TSET Be tter Health Podcast Transcript  
Episode 1: Tobacco 21  
March 6, 2020  
Summary: Health communication consultant James  Tyree and intern Cate  Howell co -host this 
episode about Tobacco 21, the new federal law restricting sale of tobacco produc ts to people under the 
age of 21. After taking a look at the research behind how and why the law originated, Cate  shares an 
interview with Dr. Amy Cohn  of the Oklahoma Tobacco Research Center. Dr. Cohn  explains why this is 
the first step toward a broader m ovement in limiting tobacco use and how it affects youth and young 
adults. Then, James  shares a conversation he had with Nancy Packwood, owner of Norman convenient 
store Alameda Market and Tackle, who discusses her perspective on how the new law has affect ed her 
business and why she supports it. Cate  closes out the episode by sharing how and why she came up with 
the TSET podcast and how the TSET team hopes our listeners will benefit from it.  
[Theme music ] 
[0:15]  
JT:  Hello and welcome to the first ever TSET Better Health Podcast! This is your host James  
Tyree, health communication consultant here at TSET, and I am joined by today's co -
host Cate  Howell, our TSET health communication intern and the driving force behind 
launching this podcast.  
CH:  Hi everyone. It's great to be here for the launch of this podcast. I am really excited about 
it. And thank you very much to James  for agreeing to host it.  
JT:  Than k you! You know, we're excited about it too, and later, we will hear more about 
how and why you came up with this idea.  
The subject for this first episode is Tobacco 21, which is the term for raising the legal age 
to buy tobacco products from 18 to 21. I t's a timely topic because this became federal 
law this past December. I will end the suspense right now and say that TSET and our 
partners including the Oklahoma State Department of Health are very happy about this. 
Why? Because, again, cutting to the cha se, raising the legal tobacco age to 21 could 
prevent more than 220,000 tobacco -related deaths among people born between 2000 
and 2019, including the reduction of lung cancer deaths by about 50,000 people. We 
realize this can be a sudden and major adjustme nt for those who are most directly 
affected, namely 18 - to 20 -year -old tobacco users and retailers, but we will address that 
in this podcast. But it remains important to explain how and why raising the legal age for 
tobacco will make a positive impact on t he physical and financial health of Oklahomans.  
CH:  That's right, James , and I recently got the chance to interview Dr. Amy Cohn , an 
associate professor of pediatrics at the OU College of Medicine and the faculty member 
of the Oklahoma Tobacco Research  Center. It was really interesting to hear her 
perspective on not only how raising the tobacco age will lower tobacco use and 
addiction, but also how tobacco consumption seriously affects the cognitive and behavioral development of youth and young adults. It was a really informative interview 
and we'll play that later on in the episode.  
JT:  And after that we will hear from Nancy Packwood, owner of Alameda Market and Tackle  
in Norman. Nancy will talk about the adjustments she had to make at her store wh en 
this law took effect and share her own views on Tobacco 21.  
CH:  But before we get to that James , can you explain what the law actually says ?  
JT:  I can and will! T his comes directly  from the U .S. Food and Drug Administration website : 
'On December  20th, 2019, the president s igned legislation amending the Federal Food, 
Drug and Cosmetic A ct an d raising the federal  minimum age of sale of tobacco products 
from 18 to 21 years. It is now illegal for a retailer to sell any tobacco product including 
cigar ettes , cigars and E -cigarettes to anyone under 21 . Effective immediately , retailers 
must not sell tobacco products  to anyone under the age of 21.'  
CH:  In addition , the FDA on January 2nd issue d new rules sayin g flavored cartridge -based 
tobacco  products  would be unauthorized for sale as well. And that's even more  good 
news , because vaping  had become so popular so quickly among middle and high sch ool 
students and young adults.  
JT:  You know, the federal law may have seemed to come on suddenly, but the idea really 
had been brewing and gaining mo mentum over the past few years. I n June 2015 , Hawaii 
became the first state to raise its tobacco legal  age to 21. T hat landmark law became 
effective o n January 1st, 2016 , and only a few months later, California be came the 
second state to adopt Tobacco 21. Three more states followed suit in 2017 , and by 
2019 , before the federal law took effect , 19 s tates and the District of Columbia and at 
least 530 local governments had all passed Tobacco 21 laws. T his information according 
to the Center for Tobacco -Free K ids. Here in Oklahoma , TSET  has been a leading voice 
for raising the age to 21  through our Tobacco Stops With M e campaign. Tobacco 21 is 
one of seven policies that, when en acted , can collectively cut our state 's smoking rate in 
half while protecting many thousand s of kids from future addiction .  
CH:  Yes, and the research shows that 95%  of adult smokers started using tobac co before age 
21. So, of course, fewer youths and  young adults will start smoking, vaping or dipping if 
they cannot  legally buy the products. The Center for Tobacco Free Kids c ites a 201 5 
report from The Institute of M edicine which found 'that increasing the tobacco age  will 
significantly reduce the number of adolescents and young adults that  start smoking , 
reduce smoking -caused  deaths and immediately impro ve the health of adolescents, 
young  adults and young mothers who would be deterred from smo king, as well as their 
children.' A s we know , nicotine is very addictive to people of all ages , but espe cially for 
kids and young  adults who are younger than 25.  Nicotine is especially dangerous for 
younger people because their brains are still developing. Dr. Amy Cohn  explains this and 
more during a conversation that I had with her.  
JT:  Yeah, l et's lis ten to that right now.  
 [6:05]  CH:  So tell me your name and your title and what you do a little bit ? 
AC:  Amy Cohn , associate professor in the department of p ediatrics at the Oklahoma 
Tobacco Research Center at the University of O klahoma Health Sciences Center. M y 
work focuses on mental health and substance  use factors related to tobacco use and 
reasons for appeal for flavored tobacco products in y outh and young adults.  
CH:  How long have you been doing this?  
AC:  Oh, let's see , since 2013, so about seven years I've been focusing specifically on t obacco 
regulatory science. I've been doing work in mental health and substance use factors 
since 2007.  
CH:  What kind of progress and evolution have you seen in the legislative side and the impact 
side since you started here?  
AC:  So, I was just having a conversation with one of my colleagues about this yesterday that 
we are seeing so much rapid movement in policies the last several weeks in particular 
with the changes in tobacco 21 , with the changes in e -cigarettes and flav ors. It is moving 
very quickly. S ince I started working very specifically  in this field of tob acco regulatory 
science in 2013,  I have seen a huge increase in interest in understan ding e -cigarette use 
in youth and young adults , and we've seen that because of the rise in e -cigarette use in 
this age group. There's also been a significant increase  in alternative tobacco use in 
youth and y oung adults, and we've seen a lot of interest in that area from the research 
side as well , and the Food and Drug Adminis tration Center for tobacco products 
increasing their interest in terms o f regulating these products. P reviously , these 
alternative tobacco products, like e -cigarettes , little c igars , cigars , were not regulated by 
the F DA. But now they do come under the FDA regulation,  and that happened only a 
few years ago. S o one of the things that we do see a lot in this field are, you know , FDA 
indicate s their interest in moving towards the policy, but we f ind that it can take sever al 
years for any action to ha ppen. So, it's great to see that  Tobacco 21 is happening. It is 
great to see that there's been movement on e -cigarettes and flavors. I think we can 
continue to go a little bit further in those areas to focus on me ntho l as well and other 
alternative tobacco products.  
CH:  So, you focus pretty specifically on youth,  right , and flavoring? C an you tell me about the 
mental health relationship between tobacco use and youth?  
AC:  Yeah, so my work focuses on youth and y oung adults , and one of the reas ons why I 
focus on young adults  is that substance use is highest in that age group . Alcohol , 
tobacco, m arijuana use is highest in that age gro up compared to any other group. W hy I 
focus on youth is because youth are just lear ning and coming into their own substance 
use patterns.  
And so I focus on individuals who may be initiating substance use , but als o that group of 
individuals who may have already started using and deterring progression of substance 
use. A nd so what we see  overall is there's a very high correlation between tobacco use 
with mental health and substance use . So, I've done research lo oking at different 
patterns of alcohol, t obacco , marijuana use in youth and y oung adults. Overwhelmingly, we see alcohol is the m ost popular pattern of use , and that's proba bly because it's 
easiest to get. P eople see it as this low -hanging fruit. But , we also see alcohol is 
prevalent in a variety of other patterns of use. So, we see alcohol and cigarette use is 
very common and alcoh ol and marijuana use is very common. In one study , we found , 
we actually looked at the int ersection of mental health and m enthol tobacco use in 
young adults , and we found that mental health was actually significantly high er among 
young adults who used m enthol tobacco products compared to those who didn't , and 
one of my theories behind that is because of this soothing , cooling sensation of m enthol 
might giv e people who have some sort of mental health p roblems or anxiety or 
depression a little, you know, kick , a little boost in their mood, because of that pleasant 
sensation of menthol. You know, t here's still more work to be done in that area, but I'm 
very interested in finding out w hat are those kind of psych ological cognitive benefits of 
menthol smoking that  may interact with mental health.  
CH: So there are ' so you 've seen actual improvement in smokers who use menthol ' a 
mental health improvement.  
AC:  I wouldn 't say improvement because I think improvement would imply that we did 
some sor t of causal longitudinal study ' 
CH:  Right.  
AC:  'but we've found a correlation between those who use menthol tobacco products, 
men thol-flavored tobacco products, and higher symptoms of mental health problems 
and the symptoms we were looking at specifically were anxiety and depression, but we 
don't find that in every group. So there's other factors that may underlie reasons f or use 
depending on the subpopulation you look at.  
CH:  Tell me just about how, like, how you feel about the T21 law, what you think its impact 
will have, how it will play out?  
AC:  Yeah, that's a great question. So I think T21 is a great movement in regulating tobacc o 
use and keeping it out of the hands of young people. You know, we know that, as I said 
before, youth and young adults are just initiating their patterns of use, so anything that 
we can do to deter the development of those patterns of use when people are younger 
will be helpful, and, you know, increasing the age of tobacco purchases is one step 
towards doing that. And, you know, the host of research shows that individuals who are 
between the ages of 18 and 20 have significantly lower rates of smoking in th ose areas 
where Tobacco 21 is in effect, s o we know that it works. I think one thing we need to 
work on is getting the message out to people , getting the message out to consumers , 
getting the message out to parents, getting the message out to tobacco retailer s about 
this new policy.  
CH:  How do you think ' let's talk about the relationship between youth smoking, or I mean 
young adult smoking and youth smoking. I talked to a Paula Lau the other day who 
works with Jenks public schools, and she was talking about how a lot of times youth get 
cigarettes, get e -cigarettes, from older kids, from young adults. And a lot of times 18 
year olds are still in high school. So talk about how this law would impact accessibility 
for youth.  AC:  Right. Yeah, I mean, I think that, like I said, I think the law is a good step, but young 
people will find a way to get around it. So, bumming cigarettes from older individuals, 
finding ways for individuals who are 21 or older to get them cigarettes is not going to be 
that difficult. I think peopl e have been doing that for alcohol for a very long time. In 
terms of the intersection of youth and young adult smoking, the majority of young 
people start smoking before the age of 18. Even before Tobacco 21, people who are 
younger than 18 were finding way s to get cigarettes. So while, again, I think this will 
help reduce cigarette smoking, I think young people will still find ways to get around it 
by getting cigarettes from their parents, from their siblings, from their siblings' friends. 
And unfortunately , there isn't a whole lot we can do about that except improve 
prevention campaigns to get messages out to young people about the harms associated 
with smoking, that it's not beneficial to them, that it doesn't help them with their ' in 
their social network s, and that peers don't necessarily approve of cigarette smoking 
these days. Vaping is another issue altogether.  [laughs]  
CH:  Well, and it has a negative impact on your mental health, right?  
AC:  Yes.  
CH:  I mean, you've studied that correlation as well.  
AC:  Yes. Yeah, you know, that , for me , is a ke y motivator that I would want young people to 
know about, that there is a strong intersection of tobacco and other substances and 
mental health issues, and that if you don't start smoking, you definitely decrease your 
risk of having those problems develop later on. A nd there is nothing beneficial to using 
nicotine in tobacco products. So for alcohol, there is some research that shows that a 
little bit of red wine in moderation can be beneficial to your health when you're an 
adult, but there has been really no research to show that there's beneficial effects to 
combusting or ingesting nicotine in tobacco products.  
CH:  Can you talk about the ' kind of on that vein, the cognitive impacts, the 
disproportionate impacts from youth to adult as far as tobacco use, what t hat does to 
your brain as a kid?  
AC:  Yeah. I think one of the biggest concerns that we all have about youth tobacco use and 
nicotine uptake is the fact that the brain is still developing and nicotine does have an 
impact on the brain. We do know nicotine is a s timulant. That's one of the reasons why 
it does boost people's mood. It does have a mood enhancing effect. In fact, we also see 
very high rates of tobacco use in military populations because nicotine does give that 
kind of mood -boosting effect. But since t he youth brain is still developing, nicotine 
ingestion is only going to impede the healthy development of the brain processes.  
CH:  Okay.  
AC:  Was that good?  
CH:  Yeah! It was excellent! [all laugh]   Well, Dr. Cohn, thank you so much. It has been a pleasure , and I look forward to seeing 
more research that you do. Thank you for talking wit h us today.  
AC:  Thank you. I appreciate  it.  
 [16:47]  
JT:  That is very good information from Dr. Cohn. Thank you for sharing that.  
CH:  Yeah, you're welcome, James. I thought it was a really great conversation, especially for 
her to share her unique perspective as an experienced researcher focusing specifi cally 
on how tobacco targets young children, especially with their flavored products and their 
bright packaging and, you know, how they try to hook you when you're young , but 
nicotine literally does damage to the developing brain, and so that impacts your 
cognitive abilities. It really really does a lot more damage to your future than you think.  
JT:  Yeah, you know, she mentioned something that I am also pleased to see, which is the 
recent movement and momentum on legislation on e -cigarettes, tobacco flavors and 
T21. These matters, they often take a very very long time to make progress, and that 
certainly is true of tobacco policy as well. It's taken decades to really get momentum. So 
the movement that we've seen in recent years and weeks these areas is particularl y 
encouraging. And also, you know, what she said about why she focuses on both youth 
and young adult tobacco use was also fascinating. You know, they are all young people, 
but youth and young adults are at different stages of social and physical developmen t 
and use patterns. So I'm glad that she was able to comment on that a little bit.  
 You know, we are concerned about kids starting tobacco use because it often leads to 
addiction. As we have heard, so many tobacco users started using before the age of 18, 
but it bears repeating that limiting tobacco access to ' from 18, 19 and 20 year olds is 
also important because young people of this age group are also susceptible to nicotine 
addiction and the health and financial detriments that go with it. Now, you have  
information on that from a recent article from the American Academy of Pediatrics.  
CH:  Yes I do, James. The article  headlined 'Tobacco 21 laws linked to decrease in smoking 
among those ages 18 to 20' had some very interesting findings.  
 Results from a survey of  more than 1,800 18 - to 22 -year -olds showed about 64% of 18 
to 20 year olds who were not exposed to Tobacco 21 laws reported recent smoking, 
compared to the 46% who were age -restricted. Similarly, half of those who were not 
age-restricted were regular smoke rs compared to just over 1 in 4 who were restricted.  
JT:  Those really are some pretty big gaps between those people in that age group who lived 
in areas where they were restricted and can't purchase tobacco compared to those who 
were not restricted.  
CH: It is. 
JT:  So the data  really is clear. As we said earlier, a higher purchase age could prevent over 
220,000 premature deaths, including 50,000 from lung cancer. That cannot be ignored.   Now, we at TSET and many other health and wellness related agencies and 
organizations have e ducated and advocated for Tobacco 21 for quite some time. Even 
so, the new law means major adjustments for adults under age 21 who smoke dip or 
vape. We are talking about legal adults who can no longer use a deadly but legal 
product, and we know that nicot ine can be especially difficult to quit.  
 You know, the other group of people who are most directly affected by Tobacco 21 are 
store owners and clerks who sell tobacco products. They are on the front lines of 
applying this federal law, which may also become  state law if the Oklahoma legislature 
of this year passes Senate Bill 1423 during the session. Now, someone may ask why 
bother making this a state law if it's already the law across the entire nation? Well, the 
main answer comes down to law enforcement. I f raising the age is also a state law, then 
the ABLE commission and other state and local authorities will have the authority to 
enforce and investigate local Tobacco 21 cases. This, of course, makes it even more 
important for retailers to comply with Toba cco 21 laws.  
 I recently discussed this with a store owner in east Norman who also owned a small 
store for years in Broken Bow down in southeast Oklahoma, and her store was near a 
school. So let's listen to that conversation.  
 [21:37]  
JT:  Hello, this is James, and we are here with Nancy Packwood who is a store owner here in 
east Norman. And we appreciate your time. I'm talking about this issue about Tobacco 
21. Can you tell us a little bit about yourself and your experience in owning and ru nning 
stores here in Oklahoma?  
Nancy Packwood: Yes, James. I moved here to Norman in July of 2018 and purchased my current store in 
March of 2019. I had owned a convenience store in Broken Bow area from 2002 until 
present. The experience in Broken Bow was a small town, ve ry rural experience. But also 
the experience in Norman has been very very same, this situation. I'm outside of the city 
and it's more like a community out here, small community. So we see a lot of the same 
people every day, but we also have a tremendous am ount of lake traffic and every 
degree warmer is more people on Alameda coming to the lake, and it's been a very 
pleasant experience and we really enjoy serving the community.  
JT:  Alright. What's the name of your store?  
NP:  The name of my store is Alameda Market an d Tackle . We're at 7500 Alameda Drive in 
Norman.  
JT:  Okay, very good. Now, most of your experience was down in Broken Bow, and from 
what I understand you were near schools and such. Did you see a lot of high school 
students either buying or trying to buy tobac co cigarettes or other tobacco products 
when you were there?  
NP:  Yes, it was much more prevalent there because of our area where we had a lot of 
walking traffic close to the school, the football stadium, the basketball stadium. Yes, we 
had more attempts to pur chase, but we've always had a 100% ID guarantee policy where we just checked everybody, and praised the ones who looked younger than they 
were, but if you just follow through 100%, you're just okay. You hold everybody to the 
same standard.  
JT:  Okay. And what about h ere in Norman? It's a different area. It's a ' you're not near a 
school, you're out near Lake Thunderbird. Do you see many young adults here on their 
way to or from Lake Thunderbird, or different situations in which you see young people?  
NP:  Yes. It's a very different situation and our local tobacco buyers that are under 21, we 
only have to ID them once. They understand that we follow the rules, so they ' the 
majority of them have never tried a second time to buy. Being under 21 with the lake 
traffic that we have, I believe they feel like they're away from home, they can get by 
with more, but we just follow a 100% ID program and we just don't allow it. But yes, you 
do see more of it from the lake traffic, and we do see a lot of young people who will be 
several  in a carload do attempt to buy it more.  
JT:  Okay. You mentioned briefly about the program and such. For people who don't own 
stores or run stores, what kind of protocol do store owners do and clerks do to make 
sure tha t the person buying tobacco is of  legal a ge? 
NP:  The rules that we follow is they just have to have a picture ID. I mean, it's just 100% the 
only way that you can make it happen, and everybody is required. Granted, we have our 
typical people who are, you know, 40 or over that we know. W e do not ID the m any 
longer. But anybody that lo oks under 40 always gets ID 'd. And we've trained them. They 
just walk in the door and lay their driver's license down or their state ID because they 
know we're going to have to see it. And any clerk that would not follow th ose rules 
would not continue to be employed.  
JT:  So I would be ID 'd of course.  
NP:  Yes, of course. You look only 21, James.  [both laugh ] 
JT:  Thank you for that. Well, knowing that, just from your experience operating stores, 
what challenges do you see retailers facing now that the  law has been raised, the legal 
age has been raised from 18 to 21 to buy tobacco products, not just cigarettes, but also 
e-cigarettes or snuff or whatever else. What challenges do you see them having, and 
how can those challenges be handled, taken care of?  
NP:  Personally, I've never been a smoker, so I think it's a great rule. Not everybody agrees 
with that. But the rules are the rules are the rules. That's just how you survive in this 
business. Every rule has to be followed, and there's probably way more rules pertaining 
to ' any time you sell tobacco, any type of alcohol, any type of fuel, there's 
tremendous amount of state rules, and you just follow them. It keeps you safe.  
JT:  Now, rules or laws aside, what are your personal thoughts or feelings about this law t o 
raise the legal to buy tobacco from 18 to 21? What are your thoughts on it? And I'm 
interested in asking you ' one, I was going to anyway, but also , when I came in here, I 
saw a sticker on your door that mentioned the Oklahoma Tobacco Helpline and things along those lines, which I thought was great. So with that in mind, what are your 
thoughts and feelings?  
NP:  My thoughts and feelings on that ' of course, as I said, I've never been a smoker. 
Health -wise, I do try to coach. I personally had an employee that I c ould no longer sell 
tobacco to or allow her to smoke at work because of the age change; she's only 20. But 
yeah, we try to make sure they have the number to the helpline. We have a lot of 
postings. You have things on the gas pumps, just anything to help an ybody because I 
feel like with the cost of tobacco and everything, I just think it'd be a great idea for 
everybody to quit.  
JT:  Thank you Nancy, really appreciate it very much.  
 [28:27 ] 
JT:  You know Nancy is such a delightful person.  
CH:  Yeah.  
JT:  You know, we continued to talk after th e interview for a while. Nancy  told me that she 
learned in class years ago that if you make one exception for someone that that person 
will be the one to turn you in later. So , she also said, 'I don't look good in orange, so I 
always follow the rules ever y time.'  
CH: [laughs]  
JT:  And I did mention during the interview too, I noticed when I first went to the store a 
sticker on her door for Oklahoma Tobacco Helpline, you know . 
CH:  Oh, nice.  
JT:  It was very nice. And so, it's another reminder that for people who are ready to quit or 
may need to, there are free res ources available for them and we encourage everyone to 
take advantage of that.  
CH:  Yeah, definitely.  
JT:  You know, I am so glad our first Better Health Podcast addressed Tobacco 21, what it's 
about, why it's beneficial, but also how the new law affects some of our friends and 
neigh bors in Oklahoma and throughout the nation. We always invite you to learn more 
about Tobacco 21 and other efforts to stop premature deaths from tobacco use and 
secondhand smoke by visiting StopsWithMe.com . 
CH:  And we also remind you, as James said earlier, if you or someone you know is ready to 
quit tobacco, we have free help avai lable to you from the Oklahoma Tobacco Helpline at 
OKHelpline.com  or by calling 1 -800-QUIT -NOW, which is 1 -800-784-8669.  
JT:  Well Cate, this is the very first TSET Better Health Podcast, a nd I am so glad you are co -
hosting this month because you are the impetus behind this project. Can you briefly share with us how you came up with the idea, where listeners can hear the podcast and 
what you hope they will get out of it?  
CH:  Yes, I can. I was hir ed on as an intern in August of last year, and I had never heard of 
TSET before I came across the internship application. I remember seeing the 
commercials for the helpline and particularly the 'No Judgments, Just Help' stop -motion 
commercials  really stuck  out to me, 'cause I smoked for about 6 years, so I know how it 
feels to be judged for it and to be addicted and try to quit before you actually do it. So 
when I saw the application for this position and I learned more about what TSET does 
and who we are, I was thrilled to join the team and I have enjoyed every minute being 
here and the growth that I've had.  
But, when I tell people that I work for TSET, they don't know what that means. They've 
never heard of us. They don't know all the good stuff that we do . And now I'm really 
excited about what we do  and I want to share it with a broader audience.  
So I just had this crazy idea of what if we had a podcast that talked about all the things 
that we care about?  We can talk about issues that are important to us, like the T21 law, 
breakthroughs in wellness initiatives, et cetera, and we can also talk to our grantees 
about what they're doing to improve lives in their communities and how they've made a 
difference. I want to show everyone in Oklahoma what we do and wh at we care about.  
So I drafted a plan and presented it to the team, and, to my surprise, everybody was 
excited about it and eager to make it happen. All of my experiences working here have 
been so empowering, and I'm really grateful to the team for creatin g such a 
collaborative environment here, and it just makes me even more passionate and excited 
about sharing what we do with Oklahomans.  
So you can find our show on our website at TSET.ok.gov/podcast  and wherever you 
listen to podcasts. We'll have new epis odes up every month, so be sure to follow the 
TSET Facebook page  for updates.  
JT:  Well, thank you very much. That is fantastic, and we are very grateful to have this new 
means of communication available now.  
So thank you for joining us today. And be sure to listen to the next month's podcast 
when the topic will be health care in rural communities. Until next time, this is James 
Tyree  ' 
CH:  ' and Cate Howell.  
JT:  Wishing you all peace  ' 
CH: ' and Better Health.  
 [Theme music]  
 [33:00]  TSET Better Health Podcast Transcript  
Episode 2 : Better Health During COVID -19 
April 16 , 2020  
Summary: James and Cate discuss important ways to stay physically and mentally healthy while 
practicing social distancing during the novel coronavirus pandemic.  Jennifer Goodrich, licensed 
professional counselor and CEO of Pivot: A Turnin g Point for Youth , provides valuable insights and useful 
tips for nurturing your mental health and keeping perspective durin g unusual and traumatic times.  Then, 
Melissa Oishi, RD/LD, Pediatric Dietitian at OU Physicians, explains the importance of keepin g a well -
balanced diet and best practices for safe a nd efficient grocery shopping.  Your hosts close out by 
providing  a plethora of valuable resources for quitting tobacco, meal planning, exercising at home, 
finding food, accessing state resources, homeschooling and more.   
 [Theme music ] 
[0:15]  
James Tyree : Welcome to the TSET Better Health Podcast. This is James Tyree, health communication 
consultant here at TSET, and I am with Cate Howell. Say hello, Cate.  
Cate Howell : Hello, world.  
JT:  It has been a very interesting world, I've got to say. Since our last podcast last month, so 
much has changed. We are doing this podcast a little bit differently due to distancing 
that we'll talk about in a little bit. But  here we are discussing for our subject today how 
to stay healthy, how to promote wellness for ourselves and our families during this time 
of physical distancing, which of course is important in this needed due to the novel 
coronavirus pandemic that's goin g on right now. Started at the very very end of last 
year, started to gain momentum in January and we started to feel it here in our nation in 
February and certainly in March. It has affected many thousands of people sadly, so 
we're taking precautions to b e as safe as we possibly can.  
CH:  It's strange because when we started tracking, really taking very serious measures on 
locking things down and, you know, shutting down businesses, it happened really 
around Friday the 13th, which is, you know, an interesting, significant date there. Friday, 
March 13th was kind of when  ' and, you know, right around spring break too, so for me 
as a college student, that was a really interesting time period because a lot of people 
were traveling and then all of a sudden we had to s tart taking these measures of social 
distancing and sheltering in place, or a facsimile of that, right around the time when 
we're all out and visiting people. I canceled a trip to see my grandmothe r which is sad, 
but you know, it was necessary. I'm glad I did.  
JT:  Yes. Yes, absolutely. I remember it was ' I remember on Wednesday March 11th, I 
remember that, I was at church and I was in the car afterwards and put on the Thunder 
game and I'm like, 'Why are they talking instead of having the game ?' and it was because it was delayed, and we all know what happened after that. The NBA shut down 
that evening and then it just began a cascade of thin gs, not just day by day but hour by 
hour. You mentioned Friday the 13th. By the time that happened, it's like so much had 
already taken place, and it was just so unreal.  
 So here we are in this situation: a lot of businesses are closed. We are sheltering in  
place, and we just have to do a lot of things different in order to flatten the curve as we 
often hear about. But just because we're in the situation, that doesn't put our 
importance on staying healthy, being healthy for ourselves and our families, on pau se. 
That's still very, very important. And so that's why we will be discussing better health 
and physical distancing. So very important.  
CH:  Yeah, especially right now, I would say. The more we can do to improve our immune 
systems and keep our lungs and our me ntal and emotional health stable, the better we 
will be able to see ourselves and our communities through this collective trauma that 
we're all experiencing.  
JT:  Exactly. You talked about just staying well and staying healthy. Of course, with TSET, we 
are very committed to improving our state's health by lowering cancer rates and 
lowering cardiovascular disease through lowering tobacco use and obesity rates through 
better nutrition, better physical activity or more physical activity. But it's also important 
during this time to remember our mental well -being and our emotional state of health 
as we have talked about. TSET, we are a very committed state partner for better health 
of all Oklahomans, and so we're going to be discussing different aspects of this, how we  
can be healthy and well during this very unusual time.  
CH:  We have some really great interviews lined up to cover these important topics today. 
Our first guest is Jennifer Goodrich, CEO of Pivot: A Turning Point for Youth . She's also a 
licensed professional co unselor, and she gave us some really, really great tips on 
mitigating your stress, how to maintain connection while remaining physically distant 
from our loved ones, but the importance of keeping up that social connection, to finding 
the difference, and ju st the importance of, you know, keeping grounded. So I think is 
challenging for all of us right now. What are our priorities? How do we keep up with a 
routine? Things like that.  
JT:  Absolutely.  
CH:  Our second guest is Melissa Oishi. Would  you tell us about her, James?  
JT:  Yes. Yes,  she is a clinical and research of dietitian at OU Health Sciences Center. And so 
we talked with her quite a bit about how we can continue to eat better, eat nutritiously, 
whether we live by ourselves or whether we're in a family unit. How to plan for meal s, 
how to shop so that we get the foods that we want and need, but maybe in a time when 
we're going out to grocery store less often than we used to. She gave us some really, 
really good advice.  You know, I'm glad that were going into this because, again, I  think these are very topical 
things to talk about during this time. So let's hear what Jennifer Goodrich had to share 
for us.  
[06:24]  
JT:  All right. We are here now with Jennifer Goodrich, and welcome to the TSET Better 
Health Podcast. It 's so good to have you here.  Can you please tell people what it is that 
you do, where you work and just what your expertise is?  
Jennifer Goodrich: Sure. Again, my name is Jennifer Goodrich, and I am the president and CEO of Pivot: 
A Turning Point for Youth . We actually have 48 years of history of servin g young people 
in our community and we basically address young people that have barriers in their life, 
and we assess them in five key domains of housing and basic needs, education, 
employment, permanent connections, so those relationships that are so impo rtant, and 
then health and well -being, so mental health and substance abuse services, physical 
health, sexual health ' just a well -rounded approach to their well -being so that we're 
sure to serve every capacity that they might present a deficiency in. So o ur goal is to 
wrap around them in all the services we provide to be able to meet their needs.  
JT:  Sounds like a very important organization, you know, that addresses some very 
important needs for some of us. That's really good.  
I wanted to start with a very g eneral question. We are living right now in very unusual 
times because of the novel coronavirus pandemic. Wanted to ask, just from what you 
have seen and read and observed, how is social distancing and sheltering in place 
impacting our general mental healt h? 
JG:  I think we all can agree that this is a scary time for all of us, and there's feelings of fear, 
anxiety, depression, boredom, anger, frustration, sadness, grief, we're isolated, 
disappointment, all of those sorts of things. Those feelings come from a l ot of different 
places. So we've lost our normalcy, fear of becoming ill ourselves or one of our loved 
ones. There's economic struggle and impact. And there's different expectations, you 
know, we've gone from living normalcy to what is our life like now? A nd all of those 
things start to cause stress for individuals. And so we're having to learn how to respond 
to that, and that involves how we think and how we feel about those things.  
JT:  Absolutely. Are there any parallels between the stressful situations and r eactions that 
we're seeing now and those experienced by the youth and people you work with on a 
normal basis. And if so, what are the major similarities and differences?  
JG:  Yeah. What I would say is that it makes their vulnerabilities and disparities even mor e 
profound than they are in a regular basis, and it reinforces the idea that resources are 
limited, and that we come to realize that some have a wider band of what those 
resources are and some have a vulnerability that's a lot smaller, or even don't have, you 
know, resources at all.  When someone has a past history of trauma, which most of the young people in the 
families that we work with do, even if they've developed coping skills, stress like this, 
stress at any level, but especially at this level, causes  them to go into that survival mode, 
so that fight, flight or freeze, increased risk for different types of abuse to occur. Flight 
might look like abandoning responsibilities and relationships. Freeze might look like 
immobilization, so they just shut down and they become depressed. I think the thing 
that is common amongst it all is we're all feeling stress, it's just a capacity we have to 
deal with it that's going to be the difference.  
JT:  It seems like one of the scariest things is the level of uncertainty. We  have no idea when 
this will be better when this will be over, you know?  
JG:  Yeah.  
JT:  Like there's no there's no certain end in sight and I would imagine that feeling of what 
so many of us are dealing with right now is kind of similar to what some of the people 
that yo u work with  also feel.  
JG:  I would absolutely agree, and I think what it kind of gets to the heart of it is, when you 
get in those sorts of situations, if you don't have hope, it becomes very difficult to be 
able to manage things, and sometimes that's tied to, 'How long i s this going to last?' 
and, 'If I know when it's going to last, then I know how I can plan for it.' When you 
don't have that, it's like how do you rejuvenate that hope on a daily basis to be able to 
keep moving forward?  
JT:  Yeah. That is so true. So what can w e do to rekindle that hope and to manage our stress 
as we try to wade our way through these uncertain times?  
JG:  So a couple things I would say is not one thing or one way is going to work for everyone, 
so you have to find what works for you.  
I would encourage  be limited on comparison and heavy on self -compassion. So if you are 
on social media, you'll see, even in my own personal life, there's people that all their 
closets are now clean, and they've got meal planning and all these sorts of things. Well 
that mig ht work for them, bu t if I compare myself to that and that's not where I'm at, 
then I'm going to add on to that mental health issue and that stress that's occurring. So I 
think we need to limit ourselves on that comparison and be heavy on that self -
compass ion. U nderstand that this is new for every single one of us, and so we are all 
trying to get through it together, but we all can do it in a different way.  
Create and follow a daily routine, but be flexible. I think that's important. So you might 
want it to  look one way, but things are changing daily, so having that flexibility.  
Maintaining a healthy li festyle. With social distancing ' I heard somebody actually say 
we should call it 'physical distancing,' not social distancing, so that we understand the 
impo rtance of those relationships that still need to take place. I think that that's 
important. But in it, if we're all in our homes and there's six people in my family, there's still going to be times where I need to have solitude. So being sure that we recog nize 
that, and establishing times where we can have that.  
Maintaining positive social connections. So it might look different, but still being sure 
that we have that, that's really important.  
Focus on the things you can control. There's a lot of things out  of our control right now. 
If we can focus on the things that we do have control over, we'll be better off.  
Making space for disappointment and sadness. There's a lot of grief going on. Seniors 
are not being able to have the graduation or the prom that the y dreamed of. All those 
sorts of things are occurring, and that we need to understand that that disappointment 
and sadness is not finite. I think I had a friend that was talking about her daughter 
missing out on graduation, but then felt bad about it becau se medical professionals and 
people that are experiencing COVID -19 are dying, so, 'How can I worry about my kid's 
graduation when there's bigger things in the world?' But we have to honor and accept 
and understand that all of them carry grief and that we ' it's okay. Like, it doesn't mean 
you can't be sad over here and not sad over there.  
And I think also making space for relief and joy. Even though it's a difficult time, it's okay 
to celebrate some things that are occurring, if someone has a birthday or s omething is 
noteworthy, to take that opportunity to celebrate it in the best way that you can. Again, 
it might look different but still can be honored.  
JT: It feels like this is an even more important time to celebrate whatever and whenever we 
can, you know?  
JG:  I agree.  
JT:  Yeah. Wanted to ask you, something that you mentioned, a very important point ' one 
of many, I must say, thank you for your information, Jennifer ' but about not comparing 
ourselves, or not being quick to compare ourselves to what others are doing.  
JG:  Right.  
JT:  Are there ways that we can kind of discover for ourselves what works for us to kind of 
get through this and find positive things going on?  
JG:  I think some of it is trial and error. You have to try it out and then see how it fits. I think 
any time you engage in something, you need to listen to yourself. So if it becomes 
uncomfortable, if it feels forced, if it's not a good match and you can feel it, then it's 
okay to try something else. So I think that you'll find your way through some of that trial 
and error and listening to who you are and what you know about yourself. If you're a 
parent, you might have to help your kid navigate that because kid s are, I'm sure, more 
than ever like, 'I don't know what's going on. What's happening?' They don't 
understand the same seriousness often times, why it's important to be doing what 
we're doing. All they know is, 'I don't get to go see my friends. I don't ge t to have my birthday party,' that sort of thing. So if you're a parent, it's not only navigating your 
own, but it's also navigating other people in your household and your connections, that 
sort of thing.  
JT:  Absolutely.  
JG:  I think the other thing is not to be judgmental. T hat also comes with comparison. I was 
in the grocery store recently ' we run a shelter and we also have a food pantry, so we 
work with a lot of young people who are living unaccompanied that have no family or 
parental support, and somebody had made a donat ion, and so I went to the store and I 
was gathering all that I could so I had, you know ' I didn't take toilet paper, but I did 
take a lot of microwavable meals and that sort of thing, so my cart was pretty full. 
Somebody looked at me and sneered at me, an d I just thought, 'Okay, well, first of all, 
you don't understand who I'm buying this for.' But it was a really good reminder to me 
that I don't know what other people are doing either. So if their cart is full, perhaps 
they're buying it for every older pe rson in their neighborhood. So I think that we need to 
be kind to one another when it comes to that as well.  
JT:  That's such a good point. Such a good point for us all to remember. Thank you.  
Wanted to ask, during this time, what is the importance of maintain ing structure and 
routine when things seemed to be kind of upended a little bit?  
JG:  I think it's extremely important. Routine can provide comfort, familiarity, predictability. 
Again, especially for kids, I think it's really important if you can maintain what ever that 
looks like. It might not be their regular, the old normal. It might be a new normal. But if 
you can establish it, it gives that message that, even in the chaos, I can feel safe and I 
can count on some things in my life. Again, it might look diffe rent now than it did 
before, but I really ' it can provide that safety.  
JT:  Well, as you know, we are with TSET , and we deal with tobacco control, tobacco issues, 
trying to lower serious health problems caused by tobacco and obesity. And of course, 
during this time a lot of people, you know, they may feel stressed and may turn to 
tobacco or some other substance, and most people already know that these things are 
not, you know, particularly good for you, but it's ' these are very, very stressful times. 
What can y ou say on this particular topic that people may not already realize?  
JG:  In those dynamics, I think it gets to some of the fundamental beliefs on what treatment 
is for when we utilize substances, whether it's food, tobacco, alcohol, whatever it is to 
handle st ress, you know, a lot of the model is we have to live ' we need to be present, 
live in the moment, take it day by day. But when everything around you is telling you 
prepare two weeks out, we don't know what's going to happen on April 30th, it might 
be Memo rial Day, those sorts of things, it starts to take that away from us.  
I also think it goes back to that hope ' hope piece, right? So if all I have is today, then I 
might as well enjoy today. If I can't handle today, I know that if I utilize these different  
coping mechanisms, even though I know they're not good for me, at least I know I can control that for today. I think it puts people in a position where that's where they're at. 
So they go ahead and engage in those behaviors and then it feels better for th e 
moment, but it doesn't help them get better in the long run. It doesn't change the 
overall dynamic.  
So I think it goes back to that hope and looking for the longer -term vision, and I think it's 
also a reminder that with any kind of behavior, whether it's  food, tobacco, alcohol, 
learning to say nice things to other people, that we ' there are times that relapse is part 
of that and that we need to be kind to our self especially in those moments and know 
that even if that happened today, it doesn't mean tomo rrow we can't make a different 
choice.  
JT:  Yes, good point. Yeah, absolutely. Can you share maybe a couple of strategies that could 
be helpful for people of any age, younger, older, what have you, that we can build that 
hope within us, things that we can do to  basically mitigate that stress in a positive way 
and raise that hope that helps us over the long haul?  
JG:  I think the number one thing that makes the biggest difference is to have that support 
system. So who is the person you went to before? Who's the person you can go to now? 
If you don't have that person, who can I reach out to to start to build that support 
system? But I think that's the number one essential thing, especially in the time where 
we do have to be physically distant, we have to find a way where  we can still have that 
connection. So I think, first and foremost, that is the number one thing that needs to 
happen. I think beyond that, it's looking at what are those other things, those other 
behaviors that can help me build those coping skills? So ag ain, that's going to look 
different for other people. So, is it exercising? Is it taking a walk? Is it, again, going hour 
to hour instead of day by day?  
JT: Right, very good. Are there some online or other type of resources, mental health 
resources  that peopl e can go to, or ideas and tips and places to find help during this 
time?  
JG:  Yeah, many organizations, Pivot included, community mental health centers, have taken 
on telehealth. There's also been some relaxing in the guidelines of even insurance 
companies and all that sort of thing to be able to provide telehealth, also not just if you 
can video it, but also through the telephone. So there's a lot of opportunity for people to 
be reaching out and accessing. Lots of good information on the internet, from websites 
that are based from educational entities as well as government, those sorts of things, on 
other kinds of resources available in Oklahoma City.  
211 is a great resource, if you have a specific need, to call up. A lot of the stress is also 
occurring because p eople are losing their jobs. They don't have access to basic needs, 
that sort of thing. There's a lot of other opportunities to get connection and assistance in 
those areas, which can decrease the stress and other areas if they can get those needs 
taken ca re of, whether that's with unemployment or the new guidelines on not being 
able to be evicted, so at least they know their space is available. Just lots of different 
opportunities at this point.  JT:  Very good. Those are some very, very good words to think of.  So many out there. You 
mentioned 211, which is a fantastic resource of all kinds, absolutely. Jennifer, is there 
anything else that you would like to mention that we haven't addressed yet that could 
just help people, you know, get through this time and co pe and have that hope?  
JG:  I'd like to share something I actually read online and it said, 'We need to stop trying to 
carry out everything online. Some things just need to be let go. Flattening the curve also 
involves lowering the bar and prioritizing well -being above productivity.'  
JT:  That's so helpful. And you have been so helpful, Jennifer. Thank you so much for your 
time. We appreciate you big time.  
JG:  It's been a pleasure.  
 [23:25]  
JT: Wow, those were some very excellent comments, words and concepts that we can really 
take to heart as we try to n avigate this unusual time, Cate.  
CH: Yeah, I was so glad that we were able to speak with her because she provides such an 
amazing essential service for our youth, but also her experience as a counselor is really 
coming in handy right now. And yeah, she made a couple of profound statements.  
JT:  I like what she had to say about limiting our comparisons, but being heavy on self -
compassion, not you know, not necessarily how ' it's not the greatest thing to always 
compare ourselves and what we're doing or what we're not  doing compared to what we 
see others on Facebook or in conversations. We have our own way of getting through 
this and finding out what works best for us, you know?  
CH:  Yeah, it's been really interesting on my social media. There's kind of like an ideological 
war happening between different groups of people. There's one group that's kind of like 
this cult of productivity, you know, they're like, 'Use this as an opportunity to take up a 
new hobby, learn a new language,' basically just treating this like it's some  kind of 
sabbatical or, you know, type of event instead of what it is, which is an ever -adapting, 
evolving, difficult, painful situation for people.  
But then there's another group of people who are like, 'No, we reject that, you do what 
you need to do to k eep yourself healthy and keep yourself and your family strong and 
united, you know, however that looks to you.' But this whole myth ' and I love that 
Jennifer brought that up, you know, so strongly, hammered that point home ' 
productivity and the metrics f or that are changing now.  
JT:  Yeah. You know, for some people, you know, learning that new language or taking on 
some major task, this is a good time for them. That does work for them. And if it does, 
then more power to you, go for it, take advantage of this o pportunity. But if that's not 
you, then don't worry about it. Find your own group, you know? Very, very important. 
And so, very good, good words to think about. And also what she mentioned about behaviors, things that we do, such as, you know ' this is a v ery stressful time. It could be 
tempting to use tobacco or some other substance in order to get through this, but 
having that hope, which helps us to think more long -term instead of what's happening 
right now, very important.  
 You know, we also ' we very mu ch appreciate what Jennifer had to say, and of course, 
there are many other resources out there that can help us cope to help us manage 
stress, to help us to get through this very unusual time. Of course, we are big fans of the 
CDC.gov  site because we know  that is a very, very credible source. The CDC is where we 
often turn to for guidance for science and things along those lines, and that website has 
a lot of resources on a number of things regarding coronavirus, but including, this 
includes how to deal wi th stress and coping, and I would absolutely recommend 
checking that out. It has information on what to do for yourselves, for your families, and 
it's just very, very helpful.  
CH: Yeah, and we'll include all the links that we've mentioned in the description for the 
podc ast as well, so if you're listening and you're like, 'Wow, that sounds great, I'd love 
to check that out,' well, you can go just to the descr iption of this podcast and we 'll have 
everything listed there for you.  
JT:  Exactly. You know, one thing that Jennifer  mentioned, and we'll hear later on from 
Melissa, is there are so many resources out there, not only online but also tele -sources 
in which you're able to call in and actually have face -to-face meetings over the 
computer, you know. And when reaching out for  help, no matter what type of help that 
you need, these resources really are out there for us. One remarkable resource, of 
course, that we often talk about here at TSET is the Oklahoma Tobacco Helpline. And 
we're happy to mention that the helpline has a ve ry new look that was just unveiled just 
this month, and it looks fantastic. It's very easy to navigate. We encourage you to go 
there to OKHelpline.com  and check it out. It looks really nice.  
 But you know, as mentioned, sometimes people use tobacco in order  to calm down, to 
manage stress. It's something that we can certainly be empathetic about because these 
are very difficult times. But we also know that tobacco use, while it's always dangerous, 
it really is, you know, more so during this pandemic going on.  
CH: Yeah, there's experts coming forward now urging people to quit smoking and vaping as 
well. I mean, we already saw the vaping illness epidemic, the EVALI, the vaping lung 
illness that was going on. If you ' that was only a few months ago. Now, vaping is 
different from tobacco because vaping affects the entire lung, which is also what COVID -
19 does; it impacts the entire lung. Experts have come forward in certain places, in New 
York particularly,  and they're asking not only for smokers to quit smoking, but f or Big 
Tobacco producers to quit making their products  because they're actively harming 
people in the midst of this pandemic and making it more likely to contract really serious 
symptoms.  
JT:  Yeah, that's true. You know, I found this at the American Lung Assoc iation website. The 
association's chief medical officer Albert Rizzo, he had a blog  on their site and he talked 
about how we know that  COVID -19 is a very, very aggressive virus. It's very, very contagious. It affects our lungs and while  with som e people, they have no to mild 
symptoms, when it's severe, it is very severe because it really blocks your airways in 
your lungs. Dr. Rizzo said tha t, 'COVID -19 is a lung infection that aggressively attacks the 
lungs and even leaves lung cells and tissues de ad. While it's important to prevent getting 
COVID -19 in the first place, it's also essential that we do all we can to keep our lungs 
healthy to avoid the worst effects of the disease, ' which of course goes back to the 
tobacco and the vaping that you were ta lking about, Cate. When you have these 
substances, these harmful chemicals in your lungs that are already negatively impacting 
your lungs, and then you have the threat of this virus, it can be extremely dangerous.  
CH:  I mean, it's so difficult to quit when you  are addicted, but if you ever had that thought of 
'Man, maybe I should quit,' let this now be the incentive. Let this be the sign from the 
universe. Because, you know, this is the perfect time to quit. And we're seeing a lot of 
people go out and stockpile  cigarettes because they're ' they're trying to shelter in 
place, and so they want to make sure they have enough, but let me just say that that is 
not going to help you get through this, and we need to really be focusing on keeping 
your lungs strong and he althy. One way to do that, you know, if you're ready to make 
that step, we have lots of resources to help you on at OKHelpline.com . Like James said, 
we have this brand new website, looks great. You can order a ' 
JT:  It really does.  
CH:  You can order a free starter kit that has a t wo-week supply of patches, gums, lozenges, 
totally free. And we'll also have coaching for you via text or phone call or web chat, and 
a guide, like a printout guide or downloadable guide that you can have that will give you 
tips on how to quit.  
 In moments of stress, we often reach to our substances to help us cope, and one thing 
that, you know, it sounds cheesy maybe, but meditation is a really, really good 
alternative here, and I will link a New York Times article  that has a really, really detailed, 
thorou gh, helpful guide on what meditation is, what to expect, how to build up a habit, 
and all the ways it physically benefits you. There is ample evidence to suggest physical 
bodily benefits of meditation.  
JT:  Absolutely. So again, if you are very interested, plea se check out our very new sharp -
looking website. OKHelpline.com  or 1-800-QUIT -NOW.  
 Hey, Cate?  
CH: Yes, James?  
JT: Have you been to the grocery store lately?  
CH [laughs ] I went to Homeland the other day and my anxiety was off the charts. It was 
nerve -wracking going through. And there were so many things that were out of stock. 
No toilet paper anywhere. Nothing.  JT: Yes. 
CH:  Yeah, it 's bad.  
JT:  It is wild. You know, I went there ' last couple times I went, I expected that with the 
toilet paper and such, but there are even different food items, you know, some types of 
breads, some types of staples and things that ' it was slim pickin gs, either very little 
there or none at all, like wow, i t is really, really something.  
 So yeah, grocery shopping during this time has really looked different of late, you know? 
And of course, our eating habits are really different too, because, of course, so many of 
us are working from home now instead of at th e office; the kids are home from school; 
college students are off campus now; and so our eating and nutrition dynamics have 
changed so much, and of course, we also have to think about our food budget. A lot of 
people are laid off or they have their hours c ut, you know? A nd so there's not as much 
money to go out and buy groceries.  
So we talked about this and a few other topics with Melissa Oishi, who is the clinical and 
research dietician at OU Health Sciences Center, and I think that you and everyone else 
out there, all of our listeners, would be very interested to hear what she has to say.
  
 [35:20]  
JT:  Hello, this is James Tyree, and we are here today with Melissa Oishi. Welcome to the 
podcast, and can you tell us a little bit about what you do at the Health Sciences Ce nter 
with nutrition and diet?  
Melissa Oishi:  Sure, yeah. So I'm Melissa Oishi. I'm a registered dietician. I work for the OU HSC here in 
Oklahoma City. What I do is I see kids and their families in a general pediatric clinic here. 
And so what we work on is, you know, jus t healthy habits for life, learning about 
nutrition and how it affects the body, how it can really help or hurt your performance, 
and just all aspects of health. And then the other part of my job is I'm the dietitian for 
Healthy Future. So we work specific ally with children with obesity, with their families 
and those children to help them to kind of flow that curve of growth. Also, you know, 
looking at healthy habits for life.  
JT:  Wow, that is great. That is really, really good. You know, under normal circumsta nces, 
people try to figure out how to eat well because we're always on the go and have super 
busy schedules, but now during this time when we're all sheltering and staying at home, 
it's forcing many of us that kind of stop and not be on the go so much. So what kind of 
eating and nutritional challenges can people face during this very different time that you 
are seeing?  
MO:  Sure, yeah. So I would say we're kind of getting towards the first little hurdle of what's 
going on here, and that first little part was all  that panic buying, right? So people were 
going out to the stores and buying anything and everything that they can get their hands on. Well, this kind of leaves, you know, slim pickings for people who were maybe late to 
the game or didn't have the money to  go right then. So that's kind of the first hurdle was 
the slim pickings and getting what you can get to survive basically. But it's looking the 
grocery stores are kind of getting over that hump and able to restock. So now we're kind 
of getting back to tha t normal choices that we would normally have.  
Now, with those normal choices, what I would suggest for people, since we're doing this 
shelter -in-place and, you know, you really shouldn't be going out to the grocery store 
every other day to pick up your fre sh fruits, vegetables, things like that, so kind of being 
strategic in the things that you're buying. So, buying things that are shelf -stable, buying 
things that do n't go bad fast. So things like ' you're going to get bacon and eggs and oats 
and dried beans , utilizing the frozen vegetables and fruit, utilizing t he canned vegetable 
bin, and fruits,  so when you're buying cans, though, making sure that you're rinsing 
those vegetables and not buying the fruits in the syrup, stuff like that. And then, you 
know, like potatoes and things like that that don't go bad as fast.  
JT:  Okay. So it sounds like the grocery shopping is pretty similar to what we would normally 
do, but finding nutritious items that will stay longer so that we don't have to go more 
often.  
MO:  Exactly, and th en also kind of paying attention to focusing on those nutrient -dense 
foods and skipping over those foods that are more processed, that don't have as much 
nutrients. So maybe skipping over those cookies and those crackers so you can buy less 
food items and have more nutrition.  
JT:  All right. That sounds good. I know my daughter, you know, she likes those ' just as an 
example, she likes those dried banana chips that she thinks are really tasty and could 
still be very nutritious. Any other specific ideas that might  come to mind?  
MO:  Yeah, so any of those, you know, dried fruit, trail mixes are great for snacks, too. You 
know, a little bit goes a long way with those types of things, so you can kind of keep 
those stocked in your home for a long time. Other things, you know , Greek yogurt. You 
could get them in the big tubs; those last for quite a while. And then also fruits and 
vegetables. If you have frozen fruit, make a little smoothie there for snacks for the kids.  
JT:  Oh, that 's a good idea.  
MO:  [laughs]  
JT:  Now, a lot of us tend to eat when we are stressed or if we are bored. I know I can, and 
of course nowadays, there's a lot of stress and there can be a lot of boredom going on. 
So do you have any words of advice to help us with handling those situations?  
MO:  Yes, for sure. That's actually something that I spend a lot of time talking to my families, 
just normally actually, because a lot of times on the weekend kids are bored and they 
want to graze and eat all the time. So right now obviously, we're all at home, w e're all 
kind of bored, so it's so easy to just go in the kitchen and take a peek and see what's there. The best thing that I can do to help with that is to create a meal plan, a meal 
schedule, you know, so getting the kids up at the time that they normall y would for 
school, right? So then they're having breakfast kind of at that normal time and then 
having that lunchtime when they normally would have lunch, and then having us a set 
snack time. That's kind of the biggest key there, is in the afternoons are usually when 
people are going around and grazing. So making sure that you have a set time to have 
that one snack in the afternoon, have them sit at the table there, because that kind of 
just helps to calm everything down and helps with more mindful eating;  and then also 
making sure that you're having a quality snack. So we kind of already talked about 
having those nutrient dense foods in the house. So one little tip that I give parents is to 
make sure that you're using at least two different food groups wit h one of them being a 
fruit or vegetable, and that's to help get that fiber in those kids to help them feel full 
and to tide them over until dinnertime, and dinnertime, again, should be trying to find 
to have that set time.  
JT:  Wow, that's some good advice the re, too.  You work with families, and many of us are in 
familie s. Some people, you know, they 're living by themselves. And so I know that with 
those folks, they may not meal  plan as much , or things along those lines. Any advice for 
people who just eat f or themselves and plan for themselves?  
CH:  Yeah, so making leftovers and making larger batches is perfectly acceptable and a great 
thing to utilize. So, you know, maybe you're cooking away three times a week and 
you're saving those leftovers, so you could put those in the fridge for up to three five 
days, or you can even freeze them and those can stay in the freezer and you'll have 
meals left over that you could just eat up for months.  
JT:  Yeah, that would help not only with the planning but in not having to go to the store 
quite as often, too. That's like doubly good  
MO:  Right, exactly. Exactly. And another thing that will also help to, you know, kind of keep 
you from going to the store so often is to really sit down before you go to the store and 
look in your pantry a nd look in your fridge and freezer, and then make a list of the things 
that you need for, you know, maybe two weeks. And so thinking about the types of 
meals or foods that you would like to have for the next few weeks, and then making 
that list and stickin g to that list when you're going grocery shopping, because the faster 
that you could get your grocery shopping in, that's the less exposure you're going to 
have, so kind of being quick about it is going to be helpful, too.  
JT:  Right. Yeah, good, good advice. I  wanted to ask you whether you have seen or 
encountered any silver linings, so to speak. You know, we're in a very tough situation, 
but have you seen any positive outcomes from a nutritional aspect, like maybe families 
who are spending more time together and d oing something in the kitchen or, as you 
mentioned, meal planning?  
MO:  You know, I'm kind of one of those people that always look for the silver lining of things. 
So I have a pretty good list here of things that are ' JT:  There you go.  
MO:  ' actually pre tty good. So what you said, you know, spending more time with family. 
Normally, you know, with a busy, busy schedule, busy lives, families aren't able to sit 
down for breakfast and lunch, but now they can, and they can spend that time with 
their kids or their loved ones. So multiple times, to have that inte raction, sitting down at 
the table is a huge silver lining. I think it really helps with mindful eating and just 
connecting. Another silver lining, you know, we're having more time to be able to be in 
the kitchen, so maybe we try some new recipes at this t ime, you know, using things that 
we don't normally. A lot of times, we don't think about using dried beans and frozen 
vegetables and things like that, so how does that work with your family? And then 
getting the kids in there. A lot of times kids are busy,  but since they're at home a lot, 
they're going to be taking you up on that offer to do anything out of the ordinary. So if 
they 're in the kitchen ' 
JT:  Yes. 
MO:  ' they're going to be happy doing something exciting, right? So that's kind of a nice, 
happy thing. And then,  again, we kind of touched on this, we have more time to prep 
and think about what we're going to be eating. So you're stuck at home rather than 
watch, you know, that third Netflix show, maybe you spend that time in the kitchen 
looking at recipes or things  that you could be doing for the next week.  
JT:  Very good. I guess you know about that third Netflix show, huh?  [laughs ] 
MO:  Oh yes, oh yes. [laughs ] 
JT:  Very good. [laughs]  
Now on the other hand, conversely, there are a lot of people who are struggling even 
more than usual to get proper nutrition. Because, yo u know, there are a lot of people 
who've been laid off, who've had their hours cut, kids who normally get free meals at 
schools that aren't. Do you know of any ideas or resources to help people through these 
tough situations?  
MO:  Yes. Fortunately, you know, Okl ahoma has been pretty great about getting with their 
schools and everything and getting all that in place. So for kids and school lunches and 
breakfasts, they are offering free meals to all kids, breakfast and lunch, and you can just 
drive up to the locati on and you can pick it up. So I've actually  come up with a list, let's 
see, it 's ' News 9 has created a full list  of all the Oklahoma districts that have where you 
can pick those up. And so the Food and Nutrition Services as part of the USDA has really 
utilized t he flexibilities and waivers to be able to get all these meals out to all t hese kids. 
So that's great. An other thing, $500 million has been allocated to WIC to increase ' for 
the increases in program participation so that they have the resources that the y need to 
help those people. SNAP  has also extended deadlines to re -enroll, and they're pretty 
much expediting the interview process so that people can get accepted quicker. And 
then there's $400 million additions to the food banks so that people can get the Emergency Food Assistance Program so that they can supply food banks and help those 
families. So if you're interested in any of that you can go to FNS.USDA.gov , and it kind of 
tells you all about all the waivers and flexibilities that they've be en utilizing during this 
time.  
JT:  Well, that's very helpful. That site again was F, as in Frank, N -S.USDA.gov.  
MO:  Correct.  
JT:  Oh good. Good, good. Thanks for sharing that with us. And finally, is there anything else 
that you would like to mention that we haven't touched on yet?  
MO:  You know, I'll just say wash your hands, stay inside. It sounds like, you know, we're 
trying to get that curve to go down, and so it sounds like you're doing a pretty good job 
of it. We could always do better. And then, take advantage of the telemedic ine that is 
being put out right now. So if you need to talk to your PCP, you know, nutrition services 
are in on that, so we can always talk to you via ' it's like Skype basically. You just have it 
' you could do it on your phone. It's the easiest thing to just get connected. If you need 
resources or anything like that, just try to get in and get connected.  
JT:  Good words of advice. Well, Melissa , we very much thank you for your time. We thank 
you for your insights and things that you've shared with us. We wish you all the best 
going forward and, gosh, thank you so much.  
MO:  Thank you for having me.  
 [47:53]  
JT:  Wow, so what did you think of her interview, Cate?  
CH:  I was taking notes the entire time honestly. Cooking in big batches is something that I 
have been doing lately with my little ' I live in an eff iciency apartment, you know, so I 
don't have a whole lot of kitchen g oing on, but I have a crock pot. I have  a little baby 
crock pot, and so I've been making some stuff that's been lasting me for several days in 
a row. That's been a huge lifesaver for me.  
JT:  You kno w, I asked her about eating when you're stressed, eating when you're bored, 
and that, along with other topics, you know, she mentioned structure and planning even 
for those snacks can be pretty helpful. It's helpful in terms of going to the grocery store 
during this very interesting time. It's helpful for avoiding those extra calories that could 
be junk food, how to avoid that with the structure, the planning, and just taking an 
inventory of what we have in our pantry, in our refrigerator. And developing me al plans, 
but also grocery lists so that we're able, when we do go out to go shopping, that is very 
strategic. We get all the stuff that we want and need for ourselves and our families, and 
so that way, you make better choices in the foods you buy and you don't have to go to 
the store quite as often, which is very helpful during this time.  CH:  Yeah, and when you do go to the store have a solid plan so you can execute it in a timely 
fashion and limit your exposure. That, I thought, was a really key thing. You kn ow, you 
don't want to be 'Normally, like, I don't know about you, but I when I go grocery 
shopping, you know, I'll wander around and browse. 'Do I want this or do I want that?' 
and be very like, you know, not in a huge hurry, it's not urgent to get in and out. But 
right now, I don't want to spend any time in there that I don't have to. So having a plan, 
like being able to go, 'Okay, this is from the produce section. This is what kind of greens 
I nee d. This is '' you know. That, I think, will be helpful, too . 
JT:  Yes, yes indeed. So we want to let you know, of course, there are, just like we discussed 
with stress and coping, and just as we discussed with tobacco, there are many places 
that have helpful information, but we at TSET, we do as well in terms of better  nutrition 
and physical activity. We cannot recommend enough ShapeYourFutureOK.com . The 
Shape Your Future program is about helping Oklahomans to eat better, move more and 
to live tobacco -free, and it has a wealth of information and tips to help us eat and move 
around during this time. So again, that's ShapeYourFutureOK.com . There's one page, it 
says right there, 'Eat healthy and be active anywhere,' and then it says right below, 'It is 
hard to make healthy choices because I don't live close to a supermarket  or gym,' or 
maybe if you're staying inside, you know, to avoid those places, you can still move 
around. There is a sheet there, some information of different exercise ideas, things that 
you can do at home to move around to be active, and very, very fun wa ys as well. There 
is a deal of Ten Healthy Ways to Stretch Your Dollar . So many things to check out at 
ShapeYourFutureOK.com . 
CH:  Yeah, I particularly love how they take into consideration people of all demographics 
when it comes to time constraints, being abl e to make recipes that are still healthy but 
easy and quick, things that are budget friendly. If you're not working with a lot of 
resources, which a lot of us aren't right now, you know, you can still make these healthy 
choices, and they provide really gre at guidelines for you to do that. Also meal planning; 
they have little grocery lists that, on the backside, they have meal plans for the week. So 
it's a  really, really great resource. For physical activity as well, th ey have some really 
great guidelines. So  they say that adults need at least 30 minutes of physi cal activity five 
days a week. So t hat's what we should be shooting for as adults right now, somehow.  
Managing to get ' 
JT:  That 's true.  
CH:  [laughs]  ' 30 minutes of physical activity five days per week, and kids need 60 minutes 
every day. That can be a tall order,  but they have some ideas, you know, like they can be 
broken up into ten minute chunks throughout the day. Basically get your heart rate up, 
get your body moving 10 minutes, three times a day for adults, or for kids, have them 
around in circles in the yard , or ' they have better ideas than that.  
JT: Yes. It has ideas of how to use just common household items, towels, cans of food, 
anything, how to use those to help you, to help anyone to be physically active. And so 
those tricks are also available ShapeYourFutu reOK.com .  And you're right, you know, it could be challenging when you're sheltering in place. I 
have a smart phone that keeps track of my steps and how many minutes that I'm being 
physically active, and, I tell you, the last two weeks, it had been lower t han normal. But 
it also compares me with other men using this particular brand, and I feel bad about 
mine being lower than normal, but compared to others, all around the place, they're 
way lower. I mean way lower. Normally, nationally in my average 50 minu tes per day 
and they're down to like 30 minutes a day because people are, you know, they're inside 
so much more. So yeah, it's very important to do what we can whether we are indoors 
or in our backyards, and even though we cannot take advantage of public f acilities and 
equipment right now, we can still walk, we can still jog, take bike rides while practicing 
safe and responsible physical distancing.  
CH:  Also, you know, so we have Shape Your Future, which is great and has a lots of things 
you can do right here a t home and ways you can include your kids and just, like, basic 
guidelines. We also have the YMCA. They have a whole library now of on -demand 
workout videos that are open to the public. You don't have to be a member of the 
YMCA. You just go to YMCA360.org  and it has all these videos. So really no excuse.  
[laughs]  
JT:  Exactly right. You know, we really want to let everyone know ' you probably know 
about this already, but just making sure you do, about state resources to help you get all 
the information that you need. The re is coronavirus.health.ok.gov  that gives you all of 
the information, in terms of like the latest stats here in Oklahoma, what's happening 
with the novel coronavirus, and breaks it down by a county and by gender and things 
along those lines. So when you n eed to know about the actual pandemic and the state, 
there's that. However, for resources, there is also covidresources.ok.gov . When you go 
there, there is a plethora of information or resources that can help individuals and 
families during this time. It i ncludes social services, business services, consumer 
protection, all kinds of things. Have you visited that website?  
CH:  I have. I'm really impressed. It's basically a one -stop shop for any kind of government 
service you can think of. It's got your needs for u nemployment, disability, child support, 
food stamps. It's got your election resources, like requesting an absentee ballot, which is 
going to be probably a big deal coming up. If you need birth and death certificates, if 
you need to renew your driver's lice nse ' I just renewed my driver's license online for 
the first time. Brand new. But they also have a symptom checker intake form where, if 
you feel like you might be experiencing symptoms and you're not sure if you need 
monitoring or not, you can literally fill out a form and they will give you advice in return. 
Not sure what the turnaround time is on that because I'm sure they're pretty 
overloaded, but it's there for you.  
JT:  It's there.  
CH:  Yeah, exactly. And then of course, they have the helpline, 211 or 877 -215-8336 , for if  
you're having any kind of coronavirus related concerns and you're looking to get some 
guidance from the state health department.  JT:  Yeah, it is a wonderful resource, so please check it out: covidresources.ok.gov . So there 
is a lot of help out there, a lot of  resources that people can turn to. In some ways, we 
feel physically isolated because we just have to keep our distance, and that's very 
important. And we're not living the lives that we normally do, but we truly are in this 
together with the resources tha t we have, by our ability to reach out to our own 
network, you know, of friends and family, workmates, colleagues, wonderful people 
who are looking out for us and our community. It really is helpful during this time.  
CH:  Yeah, most definitely. There's things y ou can do, and if you're feeling like you're 
struggling and you're feeling tempted to abuse substances or you're worried about 
somebody, the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services helpline, hotline, is 1-800-
985-5990  or you can text talk with us to 667 46. 
 But there's also a lots of resources out there for food. If you're struggling with food 
insecurity, the Regional Food Bank has resources on their website at 
regionalfoodbank.org . There's a list of available resources, including food pantries and 
resour ces for getting assistance with your prescriptions if you need help in that area. 
And lots of public schools are serving meals for children . I will link to that.  
There's also, you know, James, homeschooling and how to keep your kids learning and 
occupied a t home. Lots of resources available for that. Shape Your Future act ually has 
some good resources. T hey link to CATCH.org  where there's free online classes and 
materials regarding nutrition and physical fitness.  And OETA has initiated a distance 
learning pr ogramming schedule.  So if you got your TV and your antenna, you can turn 
on OETA and they've got a programming schedule with educational television sources. 
And the state department of education has a thorough list  and things to consider with 
distance lear ning. So we'll include all those links in the description.  
JT:  Very good, very good. But we want to wrap up by mentioning that, even though our 
times are different right now, that one of the things that remain the same is the 
importance to stay healthy in all aspects, and we at TSET, even though our office in 
Oklahoma city is closed, our staff and our grantees throughout the state remain on the 
job, and we are definitely committed to improving the health of all of Oklahomans in 
our state. We are here with you. We are here for you, and that will not change.  
 So we want to say thank you for tuning in. Thank you for listening. We hope that you 
have enjoyed this podcast and that you will keep the points in mind, and we invite you 
to join us again next time. But until  then, we wish you peace ' 
CH:  ' and Better Health.  
[Theme music]  
 [1:01:08 ] 
 TSET Better Health Podcast Transcript  
 
Episode 3: Role Modeling and No Menthol Sunday  
 
May 15, 2020  
 
Summary: Sunday, May 17, is No Menthol Sunday, a day for churches in the African American 
community to shine a light on the insidious nature of menthol and targeted tobacco advertising. Dr. 
Adam Alexander of the OU Health Sciences Center shares the latest research on the appeal and dangers 
of menthol, and Theodore Noel of Guiding Right shares the influential work of the organization and the 
importance of community outreach. Then firefighter and former smoker Shaun Pryor shares his 
experience with the tobacco helpline and the power of positive role modeling.  
 
[Theme music]  
 
[0:15]  
 
James Tyree :  Hello and welcome to the TSET Better Health Podcast! This is James Tyree, health 
communication consultant here at TSET, and I'm here with Cate Howell of TSET health 
communication. Cate, how are you doing today?  
 
Cate Howell :  I am doing much better now that the s pring 2020 semester is over. How are you doing, 
James?  
 
JT:  Doing pretty well too. It's been a busy stretch, but hanging in there and feeling pretty 
good. So congratulations on surviving this semester. I know you worked hard for it, 
that's for sure.   
 
CH:  Thanks, I was really lucky. I had lots of resources and lots of cool professors. I think I did 
okay, but dan g, it was really hard. [ laughs ] 
 
JT:  I hear you. Well, you survived, so way to go, way to go. And you know, on top of 
everything else, on top of work, on top school, on top of regular stuff that we d eal with, 
there's also the pandemic going on, COVID -19, sheltering in place, that has really 
upended things as well, you know?  
 
CH:  Yeah, it's at the forefront of everyone's minds on top of everything else that's going on.  
 
JT:  Exactly. Well, here at TSE T, we are cognizant of that. People are at home a lot more, 
their kids are home, t hey've been doing school at home, work at home, things like that, 
and I wanted to tell people about new resources on Shape Your Future called COVID -19 
Healthy Tools.  You go to shapeyourfutureok.com , and it's easy to find. And it has a 
number of great resources that offer healthy meal planning, but the meals are tasty and 
delicious so the ki ds will also like them; how to stay physically active while sheltering in 
place; it has downloadable activities for kids; there are a lot of really great stuff in terms 
of nutrition and physical activity during this time that is so, so different. So again,  go to 
shapeyourfutureok.com. Check it out, Cate, I think you'll like it too. I am too, I'm 
definitely going to use a couple of those recipes.    
CH:  It's definitely been hard staying motivated and finding creative ways to keep active, 
keep physically acti ve while at home. So I really like that they have all these cool things 
you can do just solo, from a safe distance.   
 
There's been a lot of misinformation about tobacco use and COVID -19. There have been 
some - just lots of confusion. There's been some conf licting studies. But just recently, 
either today or yesterday, actually I believe it was yesterday, the WHO, World Health 
Organization, released a statem ent definitively saying that, quote, "a review of studies 
by public health experts convened by the WHO on April 29 found that smokers are more 
likely to develop severe disease with COVID -19 compared to nonsmokers." So we have 
an official ruling on that. An d another group of universities and institutions came out 
just recently too saying that they found that tobacco use increases entry points  in the 
lungs for COVID -19. So, the consensus is in: tobacco use is bad, it's always been bad, it 
always will be bad, especially for your lungs, so now is the best time to quit smoking.   
 
JT:  Yeah, it's just another good reason, and it makes sense because  that virus totally attacks 
your respiratory system, as does tobacco use, so it just compounds the danger there. So 
I'm glad that you shared that with us.   
 
You know, coming up here will be an annual observance day known as No Menthol 
Sunday . It happens in May of every year. This year, it'll fall on May 17th, and this is a day 
that was organized and is led each year by the National African American Tobacco 
Prevention Network. What it does is it provides  a great opportunity for faith leaders to 
talk with their congregation members about preventing and using ' or quit using ' 
menthol flavored tobacco products in general. As we just mentioned, tobacco products 
are harmful no matter what kid you're talking a bout, but menthol has been particularly 
insidious, especially because they ensnare a higher percentage of younger people and 
African Americans.  
 
And on that, we will hear from Dr. Adam Alexander . He is a postdoctoral researcher at 
the OU Health Sciences Center. His current research interests include tobacco 
prevention and cessation, health disparities, and trauma and tobacco use. And we'll also 
hear from Theodore Noel who is the executive director of the Oklahoma City -based 
nonprofit Guiding Right . He will speak on the fight against tobacco in the African 
American community in particular and the power of role modeling that affects us all.  
 
CH:  Our third guest today is Shaun Pryor  who is an Edmond firefighter, and he has been in 
the Oklahoma Tobacco Helpline commercials. He's also just kind of bec ome a 
community activist, and he tells his story about how he was a longtime tobacco user, 
and as you said James, you know, talking about role modeling, he talks about his role 
models and how he intends to be a good role model to his children and to the ki ds he 
talks to at school, to the other firefighters that he knows, and it's just a really great 
conversation. So we have some really great guests today. I'm excited.   
 
JT:  You know, I've seen his commercials on TV quite a bit, and he seems like such a cool 
guy, just a great guy to hang out with. What was it like talking with him?  
 CH:  He's so chill. Really down to earth and - it was nice to hear his story, you know? And just 
his personal perspective on things, and he's had a very interesting life, so y ou'll see. 
We'll see.   
 
JT:  Okay. I look forward to hearing it. And as will our listening audience. That's for sure.   
 
Well, I did get to speak with Dr. Adam Alexander and with Theo Noel. First we'll talk a bit 
more about No Menthol Sunday, which as I men tioned will be on May 17th this year. 
And it's a very important day because menthol cigarettes in particular have appeal to 
younger smokers, African Americans as well because of the smooth flavoring that makes 
it easier to smoke, but also menthol tobacco p roducts and other flavored products have 
been marketed to these groups as well, which the tobacco industry is known for doing. 
But I had a great conversation about this with Dr. Alexander, and let's listen to it now.   
 
[07:46 ]  
 
JT:  Hello, we are here today with Dr. Adam Alexander, a postdoctoral research fellow at the 
Stephenson Cancer Center's Oklahoma Tobacco Research Center at the University of 
Oklahoma Health Sciences Center. Welcome, and it's very nice having you here, Dr. 
Alexander.   
 
Adam Alexan der: Thank you for having me on your podcast.  
 
JT:  Wanted to ask you about the nature of your research. What is it that you are studying, 
and what motivated you to go in this direction?  
 
AA:  So, as you stated, I'm a postdoctoral research fellow at the Ok lahoma Tobacco Research 
Center, and there I worked with Dr. Kendzor, who is an expert in smoking cessation, 
especially with the vulnerable populations such as socioeconomically disadvantaged 
adults, and when I came here, I wanted to continue in that work, but I also   developed a 
focus on African Americans and addressing smoking cessation among African Americans 
because there's a lot of research out there that shows that African Americans are less 
likely to quit. So when I came to the Oklahoma Tobacco Resear ch Center, I wanted to 
explore factors that serve as either barriers or facilitators of smoking cessation, and I've 
been doing that for two years now.   
 
JT:  Well, with this podcast, we will be speaking on menthol, and we'll also speak on role 
modeling. I wanted to ask you, Dr. Alexander, about menthol, which is, as you know, 
particularly popular among tobacco users who are young and among African Americans. 
And just in your research, what you have learned, what is it about menthol tobacco that 
makes it so particularly dangerous or even insidious?   
 
AA:  Okay, that's a great point, great point. So, yes, you're right, it's very, very common. 
Menthol use is very common among African Americans. Among 80% of all African 
Americans use menthol cigarettes as their primary brand or type of cigarette they prefer 
to smoke. And when you look at menthol, menthol acts as a flavor. It provides cigarettes 
with a minty flavor. Now, why is that? Well, especially when you look at youth, nicotine 
and tobacco itself is not a ver y tasty product. And so what menthol does is it masks that very harsh and unpleasant taste. And so when you see a youth or an African American 
young man smoke a menthol cigarette, they're usually smoking it just to mask that poor 
taste of a regular tobacco  cigarette, and what you find is that, especially when you look 
at youth, that African Americans are specifically sensitive to that bitter taste of tobacco, 
and when you use menthol, well, you no longer have to deal with that bitter taste. And 
so that's al so why you see a lot of flavors, or all flavors being banned for youth, because 
tobacco companies know that if we can mask that smell or that taste of tobacco, then 
we can hook a young population to nicotine.   
 
JT:  Right. Is it even more dangerous because  of that flavoring? Do people take in bigger 
puffs with it or anything along those lines?  
 
AA:  You're exactly - you're onto something right there. That's an important point also as 
well. Not only is it taste, but menthol also has a soothing property - it has a soothing 
effect on the body. So tobacco, when you smoke it, especially when you smoke tobacco, 
you're irritating your lungs, you're irritating a lot of your organs within the body, and so 
what menthol does is it kind of soothes those organs, so it is  possible that you could be 
taking in more of the horrible toxicants when you're smoking a menthol cigarette, which 
could actually increase your risk of suffering from some tobacco -related illness down the 
road. So yes, it potentially could be more dangero us. It could also explain why you see 
so many African Americans suffering disproportionately from certain tobacco -related 
illnesses such as lung cancer, stroke and other diseases.  
 
JT:  Yeah, very important point. Well, in mid -May of each year, there is an  event called No 
Menthol Sunday that a lot of faith communities take part in, and there are other 
menthol events that take place to draw attention to this particular product and what 
harm it does. You spoke to the danger just a couple of minutes ago, but w hat can you 
say about such an important event such as No Menthol Sunday?  
 
AA:  Oh, I think it's a very important day. Because we really need to understand as a 
community, and I think the public needs to understand in general, that menthol 
cigarettes are a different beast than just conventional cigarettes that just contain 
tobacco. Because it's really masking the dangers, I think, of smoking. I think when 
people smoke menthol cigarettes, they're not really capturing the degree of the damage 
they're really do ing to their body because the menthol, that minty, peppermint taste, is 
hiding those dangers. And I think we need the public to understand that you're at the 
same risk or possibly even greater risk of poor health outcomes when you smoke 
menthol cigarettes,  so I definitely think we need days like No Menthol Sunday, 
especially when it involves the faith community, because I think the faith community 
has played a very positive role in our battles to combat the tobacco epidemic.   
 
JT:  Do you see momentum takin g place in which menthol flavoring might actually be 
banned along with other flavors?  
 
AA:  So, there is a flavor ban in effect, but I think menthol avoided being part of that ban in 
this round of regulation. I do think a ban is coming down the road. I thi nk that - I 
wouldn't say it's inevitable, but I think it's something that's very likely in our future. I think that there's a lot of public health momentum behind that initiative, and I think in 
the future we will see a menthol ban for all tobacco products .  
 
JT:  That would be fantastic. That would be fantastic for sure. Okay, and finally, Dr. 
Alexander, most everyone knows that tobacco is harmful, that it's very addictive, but it 
is by its very nature very hard to quit, and so I wanted to ask you, based o n things that 
you have learned, what you have studied, anything in particular that you want people to 
understand going forward that can perhaps help them to quit or the benefits of living a 
tobacco -free life?  
 
AA:  That's the first thing I always say when I try to bring hope to people is to tell them that if 
you're smoking, no matter the age, if you stop smoking now, you have the opportunity 
to live a longer and healthier life. There are many free services available to you. If you're 
living in Oklahoma, esp ecially in Oklahoma City, you can access the Tobacco Treatment 
Research Program, which is free and available to the public. If you have a phone, you 
can access the quitline. And these are all great services that'll help you become smoke 
free.  
 
Now, what I  do in my research is a lot of times we focus on evidence -based treatment, 
and evidence -based treatments are great, but they have a broad appeal to a wide 
variety of people, and we're realizing I think, slowly but surely, especially as the 
prevalence of sm oking goes down, that there's certain subgroups in America and in 
Oklahoma that need additional resources and help to quit smoking. And the group I 
focus on because it's the group that's closest to me are African Americans. I think that 
African Americans f ace certain things more so than other communities such as 
discrimination that needs to be addressed in intervention, and right now, we're not 
designing behavioral interventions for smoking cessation to treat discrimination and 
other culturally relevant fac tors that influence smoking, because the research is pretty 
clear from what I read that if you're a victim of discrimination or some significant 
stressor, you respond to that incident by engaging in poor health behaviors, including 
smoking. And so if we re ally want to, you know, tackle menthol use and just smoking in 
African Americans and other communities, we really have to start looking at those 
cultural risk factors that influence vulnerable populations.   
 
JT:  Okay, alright. Thank you for your time, Dr.  Alexander.   
 
AA:  Thank you for having me.   
 
[16:29 ] 
 
JT:  Alright! It was so good to hear from Dr. Alexander there. He had some very very good 
points about what he has found, what he has learned in his research, not only menthol 
cigarettes but also health disparities regarding tobacco and other things. Very very 
interesting comments.   
 
CH:  Yeah, it reminds me of one of our first guests that we had on for our first episode, Dr. 
Amy Cohn. She also talked about the insidious use of flavored tobacco. Bu t I also really 
appreciate, you know, what he was saying about No Menthol Sunday and when we look at the church community and our church leaders and talk about role modeling, you 
know, these are influential people in our communities.  
 
So I'm happy and exc ited to introduce our next guest, Theodore Noel of Guiding Right, 
talking about tobacco use in the community level and how the faith community is such 
an influential role model in our communities and what they're doing to combat tobacco 
use, particularly i n African American communities, which are disproportionately 
targeted by tobacco advertising and, frankly, preventable deaths. So let's hear what he 
has to say about No Menthol Sunday.  
 
[17:51 ]  
 
JT:  Okay, we are here today with Theo Noel, the executive d irector of Guiding Right in 
Oklahoma City. Theo, welcome to the TSET Better Health podcast.   
 
Theodore Noel: Absolutely, thank you and good morning, James.   
 
JT:  Thank you. Hey, can you please briefly share with us the work of Guiding Right?  
 
TN:  Sure. Fantastic. Any time I have an opportunity to talk about the work and scope of 
Guiding Right, I will always make myself available.   
 
So we have an over 20 -year track record of providing public health services, particularly 
in Oklahoma City, and primarily fo cusing on the African American community. So what 
we like to say we have what we call three flagship programs.   
 
One is a comprehensive prevention program  in which we provide confidential HIV 
counselin g and testing, case management for individuals who are high risk for HIV, and 
also case management for individuals that are actually living with HIV or AIDS. We also 
have community outreach where we go out into the community and try to provide 
information about HIV and other sexually transmitted infections. So we're regularly at 
college universities, local high schools and even local middle schools talking about HIV 
and other STI's. We're trying to bring it more so in the forefront and just look at HIV as a  
chronic disease instead of the death sentence like it was, oh, you know, 30, 40 years 
ago.   
 
The second flagship program is our Women Infant and Children , and that stands for 
WIC, and it's a nutrition education program for moms and their babies up to the age of 
5. So there's a lot of prenatal care that goes into that as well, so making sure that mom 
will have optimal pregnancy and delivery and provide nutritious foods for her, for their 
children up to t he age of 5.   
 
And the third flagship program is our tobacco prevention program, and it's under the 
acronym M-POWER , and within that we really work with the African American 
community and to get those entit ies, usually businesses, churches, beauty salons, 
barber shops, to adopt a tobacco -free policy. Within the last couple years, we really put 
in there kind of a total health policy where it's talking about obviously no tobacco, but 
also physical fitness and nutrition.   
JT:  Oh, very good, excellent. So at one point along the way did tobacco policies, tobacco  
prevention and programs become ' 
 
TN:  Sure ' 
 
JT:  'one of Guiding Right's health priorities?  
 
TN:  Yeah. Excellent question. About eight years into our t enure, well, probably about seven 
years into our tenure, we started seeing trends of heavy tobacco use among pretty 
much African American young gay males. And some focus groups we met with, key 
informants, gatekeepers, and basically the results were they w ere using it as a coping 
mechanism. So, and then just general population, just even ' you would be amazed, at 
that time, the high percentage of moms actually pregnant and were smoking. And we're 
like, oh my gosh, so there's something that we have to do to address this. And so years 
into it, we're like, okay, we have to come up with a remedy, at least for something that 
as an organization that we can do to bring credence to this and to talk about prevention 
and total elimination.   
 
JT:  Wanted to ask you, yo u know, Guiding Right and TSET, we have worked together on ads 
and articles that expose the ways that tobacco companies try to entice African 
Americans to use their products. What have you seen here in Oklahoma in that regard, 
and how does Guiding Right an d others educate people on what's actually going on?  
 
TN:  Sure, sure. Like you said, James, TSET and Guiding Right has definitely done some great 
collaborative work, really relying on the expertise of you guys, but hip hop industry and 
just hip hop in gen eral as a culture is really heavy among African Americans, and so what 
I see with tobacco and large tobacco companies is really like a laser focus, is really 
strategically targeting the hip hop generation by using, at one point when Kools was real 
popular,  they would have hip hop summits and concerts sponsored by Kools, and they 
really tried to play on words, the K -O-O-L, which is cool. I mean, it's the reason why they 
spend over a million dollars a day just on marketing and advertising. So it's definitely 
had its negative impact on African American community, and other poor and 
marginalized communities of color, but really the biggest thing that we've seen is really 
how tobacco companies has used hip hop, just because hip hop now ' over 40 -50 
years, so it r eally affects a large segment of the population.   
 
JT:  Hm. I see. Now, we're doing this podcast this month because No Menthol Sunday, which 
is a national faith -based effort to draw attention to the harm of menthol, is coming up in 
mid-May on May 17th, and  I wanted to ask, to your knowledge, what effect has this had 
here on people in Oklahoma?  
 
TN:  Well, this No Menthol Sunday scheduled for May 17th is obviously, in the age of COVID -
19, is gonna be somewhat a little different as far as the gathering of actual folks with, 
you know, sitting in the pews. So we're definitely gonna have to be a little cre ative, 
more so than we have in the past, in using opportunities like this one, and other social 
media and different outlets to get the word out about No Menthol Sunday.  
 I'm a member of the Church of Living God, so in being a champion of no menthol and 
tobacco free totally, in our church you have a policy, we've always set aside that Sunday 
that was totally focused on the no menthol, whatever that theme was, happened to 
have been in that particular year. Like for the theme in 2020 is Awaken. So our pastor 
was really on board with this, and he would bring a message talking about overall 
health, and then after his message, I would get up and just read off some statistics 
about tobacco, in particular how menthol is so easy to the palate, so it's highly addicti ve 
but even more difficult to get off. So those are some of the things we've done locally. In 
the Oklahoma City area, we've worked with you guys in developing strategies and 
developing, you know, some social media. Social media is so impactful. What you se e, 
you can be influenced by.   
 
JT:  Yes. 
 
TN:  So in making, you know, really pushing no menthol, it's like a lot of kids that's smoking, 
they don't even know what menthol is. They just know they like it. They like the feel of 
the taste when they're inhaling, but have no idea what menthol actually is. So once you 
explain that and, like, you really need to be aware of what you're smoking and what 
you're putting in your body. So and I think that's one of the biggest takeaways of No 
Menthol Sunday. Some of those things are exposed. In the African American community 
as well as other communities of color, faith is very important to us. And the cool thing 
about No Menthol Sunday is it not only deals with Christianity, there are some things 
about Islam, in th e Jewish community, Catholicism, so there's different faiths layered 
into No Menthol Sunday so it's just not totally focused on Christianity, although 
Christianity is the major religion in North America of course, but the cool thing is it deals 
with other religions and the importance of a good, clean body, being in optimal health 
as much as possible. Definitely don't do any things, putting in your body that can cause 
harm to yourself or harm to others.  
 
JT:  Absolutely, yeah. Very very good points. And you mentioned social media, so this is 
wonderful not only for No Menthol Sunday, but also you can do this type of messaging 
any time of year as well, so hopefully people will get that message.  
Well finally, your agency is about community, and role modeling is,  of course, a major 
aspect of community. Not just about kids looking up to adults, although that is a 
humongous part of it ' 
 
TN:  Sure.  
 
JT:  'but also how media and culture influence the standards of everyone of all ages. So 
how does role modeling fit int o the things that you say and do in your tobacco 
prevention services?  
 
TN:  Being a former athlete, I really don't like what a lot of professional athletes used to say, 
"I don't want to be viewed as a role model." Sometimes you don't have a say -so in that 
just because your stature, and for me, my dad was my role model. So being a father and 
a husband myself, and being a gatekeeper or an ambassador of good health and 
outcomes in the African American community, I want to ensure that I am doing, as an 
individu al, everything that I possibly can on a daily basis to exhibit leadership skills to make sure that I'm in optimal health. You're not gonna find a picture of me with a cigar 
in my hand after my daughter was born even though that was the cool thing to do, yo u 
know, you hand out cigars because you have a child and all. You know, you're not gonna 
find me doing that. So role modeling is part and parcel to all of the programs that we 
have. In the field of public health, again, we are viewed as the so -called healt h 
professionals, so if you are doing something that's going to have a negative impact, you 
just never know who's watching you. In public health, even when you're off the clock, 
you're on the clock because it's 24 hours a day and seven days a week. So...  
 
JT:  So true.   
 
TN:  Needless to say, somebody is always ' someone is always watching you.   
 
JT:  [laughs]  
 
TN:  And, like I said, growing up, you know, my father was my role model, so I like to take 
some of those same attributes being a father myself and a  husband, you know, I don't 
want my 12 -year -old daughter to have to think about, you know, "Oh I saw daddy, you 
know, smoking, so it must be okay for me to do that as well." It transfers into our 
tobacco prevention services that we have here at Guiding Rig ht. Modeling is very 
important in that. They see us promoting a smoke -free environment . They see 
advocating the Quit N ow number. They see us advocating and speaking about No 
Menthol Sunday, or even Kick Butts Day. They see us in the park every Kick Butts D ay 
picking up butts and, you know, putting them into bags, and we try to have young kids 
out there with us, although that's not our major focus, but we collaborate with, James, 
oh gosh, I used to call them the Healthy Living Program back in the day...  
 
JT:  Yes. Communities of Excellence.   
 
TN:  City County Health Department. Communities of Excellence, that's right. We collaborate 
with those guys at the City County Health Department and they would provide those 
services as a joint venture doing Kick Butts D ay. So I think that's all a part of role 
modeling and being a community influencer.   
 
JT:  Very good. Well, Theo, man, thank you so much for your time. We appreciate your time, 
we appreciate the work that you put in and that your staff puts in to help fami lies and 
individuals achieve and maintain better health. Thank you, man.  
 
TN:  Excellent. Thank you James, I appreciate it.   
 
[29:02 ]  
 
JT:  Wow, you know, as a health communication consultant at TSET, I've actually had the 
privilege of working with Theo a nd his staff at Guiding Right on media and messaging 
products. So it was really good to talk with him for a few minutes about No Menthol 
Sunday and other community -based interventions for reducing tobacco use in that 
community.   
 CH:  Yeah, gosh, he seems like such a cool person, and what a cool organization! I had never 
even heard of Guiding Right, and they've been around for a while doing really important 
stuff in the community.   
 
JT:  Yes, very much so. Very much so. The state is very lucky to have that particular agency.   
 
CH:  Yeah, definitely.   
 
JT:  He talked about role modeling and such, and I know that, you know, role modeling, of 
course, is a big deal. You know, I remember when I was younger ' I'm a bit older than 
you. [laughs] But when I was younger, smoking was allowed in so many other places. 
They were allowed in places of business and grocery stores or wherever else. Even 
teachers were still allowed to smoke in schools. I remember my younger brother when 
he was in the second grade, he had a  teacher who smoked in the classroom back then.  
 
CH:  Wow. [laughs]  
 
JT:  You talk about ' I know, exactly. Bad health, bad role modeling. But now because of 
the changes over time, norms are different and what seemed to be normal back then 
now is not, and role modeling has so much to do with that.   
 
CH:  I cannot imagine one of my high school teachers smoking  in the classroom. That is like ' 
 
JT:  What about your second grade teacher smoking in the classroom?  
 
CH:  Oh my god, no. [laughs]  No. My dad was a sm oker and he hid it from me for a really long 
time. But it was funny, one time I caught him. I was really really young and I caught him 
smoking on the porch after he thought I had gone to bed and I said, "Don't worry, Dad, I 
won't tell anyone ." [both laugh]  And he was like, "You were the one I was trying to hide 
it from!" But luckily he quit and he's stayed quit for years, so. He's tried to be a good 
role model for me.   
 
JT:  Yeah. There are so many role models that we see on TV, that kids see on TV or socia l 
media or movies, but no one is a bigger role model than one's own parents and 
grandparents and caretakers, and you really got to have a great discussion about that.   
 
CH:  I did. Shaun Pryor did ' he's just so cool, and he's a volunteer firefighter, and he's been 
on our Oklahoma Tobacco Helpline commercials for a while. He's been a great advocate 
and he had a very personal story to share about the way he grew up, his parents, his 
own role models, but then also his transformation and how the helpline reall y, really 
helped him, and he ' he said he still calls sometimes when he needs to, and he 
encourages '  
 
JT:  Wow.  
 
CH:  'other people that he knows need help to call. So let's listen to that conversation and 
you'll just see what a cool guy Shaun is.   
 [32:2 1]  
 
CH:  So, we're here today with Shaun Pryor, who has been the face of the Oklahoma Tobacco 
Helpline success story, so hello Shaun. Thank you so much for being here with us today.   
 
Shaun Pryor:  Hey, thank you so much for having me. I really appreciate  it.  
 
CH:  How have you been during this pandemic?  
 
SP:  Yeah, we're good, we're good. I think for the most part, I think I spend a lot of time 
talking to other firefighters and friends who are going through the same thing and are at 
home like I am right now, and they're bored and fidgety and keep thinking about 
smoking, so I get to keep talking them down and telling them to call the helpline.   
 
CH:  Wow, that's great. What a way to use your time  right now. 'Cause, yeah, I mean, we saw 
cigarette sales and tobacco sales skyrocket when people started preparing for the 
pandemic. They were, like, stockpiling everything. And so you actually have been using 
your role here to help people during this pandemic.  
 
SP:  Yeah, I've really done my best with that. I have a couple of friends who are firefighters 
out near where I'm a firefighter as well, and we've been having conversations. That, 
ironically, is one of the biggest things that they did, and I had to talk them down, and 
they said, "Man, I can't find toilet pape r and this and that, but I've gotta get smokes," 
and they were just starting their quit journey, and I was like, "Look, call the helpline, but 
remember you can always call me, you can vent to me, you can scream at me, you can 
shout into the phone, I'll tak e it, whatever you gotta do," and so far they're doing okay, 
but I know that, something that I've said to everybody, dipping is part of our culture, 
and so getting guys to quit dipping as they get over that hump to quit, you know, that 
urge when you're bor ed and there's nothing going on and it's quiet and you're alone, oh 
my gosh. So yeah, it's been a blessing to have an opportunity to help others, to try to 
keep from doing it, even if it's just to, like, meet and stand six feet away from each other 
and say , "Quit it. Don't do that," you know, which I've actually done. [laughs]  
 
CH:  Wow. That's great. That's great that you can help people like that. So ' 
 
SP:  Always in recovery, right? Always in recovery, man. A smoker or dipper, always, always.   
 
CH:  Yeah , well, and especially, you know, in times of uncertainty, everyone flocks to those 
comforts that have been there in the past, even though it can be completely 
destructive, but it's something familiar, so... understandable. So, Shaun, let's back up. 
Tell u s a little bit about you. Tell us your story. You said you're a firefighter.   
 
SP:  Well, so, I would love to tell the story, I love it. So, me and my smoking story, we go back 
years and years ago. I am originally born and raised in Chicago, Illinois. My m om used to 
smoke. My mom loved to go down to the corner store, pick up a pack of smokes. I used 
to see her do it, obviously confident as a kid. I didn't start smoking until I was about 17 
years old here in Oklahoma. I started smoking, as embarrassing as th is is, by picking 
cigarette butts out of a bank off of Northwest Expressway and 63rd because I wasn't old enough to buy them, so me and my buddies used to sneak over there and we'd steal the 
little sniped cigarettes and we'd smoke them 'cause we thought we  were cool. I know 
that's terrible, but you know.   
 
And that was kind of my introduction to smoking. And I mean, I smoked for years and 
years. I started dipping probably when I was about 25, and then I would smoke with the 
dip in, and I did that for many, many years. And then about the age of 35, I had a heart 
attack. It's funny, in the days prior to, I just, you know, I didn't feel good, you know, I felt 
rough. I had a heart attack alone in my apartment by myself. The next day I go to the 
hospital, which I  was blessed to survive, found out that I had hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy, which is a long way of saying I have an enlarged heart, and I had a 
hardening of my heart kind of around it, almost like a calcification if you will. So my 
heart beats harder and it  has to work harder to get that blood flowing around my body. 
And as I talk to you, I actually have an implant in my chest right now as we have this 
conversation.   
 
And so, of course, post -that, I quit. Totally quit smoking, you know, I knew I had to, I wa s 
afraid, and so I was good for about a year and a half. I was able to recover from the 
heart attack and started to look at the fire service. And so, I got into the fire service, 
managed to pass all the physicals and everything, went through academy, and a s I 
started going through, and I'm on call, stuff like that, I'm seeing things I haven't seen 
before, and I start dipping. Because everybody around me dips. And I decide I'm gonna 
start smoking. And at first, I tried to hide it from my family, but I just k ept, you know, 
finally, it was just part of my normal, and I started smoking and dipping again. And 
between my son coming to me and saying, "Dad,' you know, 'please. You've had a 
heart attack. You've almost died. Stop," and knowing that it didn't make any sense for a 
guy that's had a heart attack in his ' I mean, I'm thirty... eight years old now, about to 
be 39, you know, it makes no sense. So I went to the doctor, and after a conversation, 
he told me about the Oklahoma Tobacco Helpline, I was like, "What is this?" Wasn't 
interested in help because I was like, "I'm not weak, I don't need this," and I ended up 
calling you guys and got tons of help, and here I am now, coming up on a year without 
smoking, no intent to look back, and it's been outstanding.   
 
CH:  Wow. That's great. So the helpline, I mean, that literally contributed directly to your 
ability to quit.   
 
SP:  There's a line  in that commercial that they use, and I will say it again to you right now, 
that the Oklahoma Tobacco Helpline was instrumen tal in my success, I mean absolutely 
instrumental. You guys gave me a tool that I didn't have, and I tell people all the time, 
and some people, they hate to hear it, but I always say we are in recovery. I realize it's 
not alcohol, it's not drugs ' but it i s, because it's our vice, it's what we know, you know, 
there's so many times we can think of as smokers or as guys who dip, it was our comfort 
in a situation. And so you're always recovering. You know, it's always something that 
you might slip. It's always  something, you know, that you're always trying to beat, I 
guess. It's your demon.   
 
CH:  So, how has your life changed since you quit?  
 SP:  Well, first I'd like to say that my son revealed to me that kids were making fun of him 
because he smelled like ci garettes, and so that's changed in that I didn't know him and 
my clothes smelled 'cause I couldn't smell it. So that's a big change and a positive for 
him. But mostly, I would say health -wise. A lot of my heart muscle, while it'll never go 
back to the way that it should be, is, my heart is functioning at a higher level, so I think 
they said it's something like 88, 89%, which is outstanding when you've had a heart 
attack. Also, I can breathe better, I feel better. I don't get winded in the course of a 
conver sation. There's just so many things that have become so much better health -wise 
for me. My breath doesn't stink. [laughs]  The little things we take for granted. So yeah.   
 
CH:  So, I just saw here that you used some money that you had saved on tobacco to put a 
down payment on a car?  
 
SP:  That is 100% true. I was so proud of that. Sitting in my driveway right now is my Camaro. 
I know I'm gonna get slapped for this, but I am a huge Texas Longhorns fan ' 
 
CH:  Ah! [laughs]  
 
SP:  'and I always wanted a burnt o range Camaro. Always have. So I literally, literally kept 
taking the money that I would've spent on my cigars and my tobacco, and we have this 
bucket, it just sits here in the corner, and I was just tossing the money into it. And I 
didn't know what I was g onna do with it, but I just kept piling it up. At one point we 
checked and it was up to something like 850 bucks, like no joke, it was insane.   
 
CH:  Wow.  
 
SP:  And I was confused, I was like, "We gotta celebrate, we gotta do something." Well, at 
the time,  my vehicle that I'd had for years was kinda acting up, and I was like, "You know 
what? I should buy a car." And lo and behold, here we are, so. Best purchase I've made, I 
love it!  
 
CH:  Wow, that's awesome!  [laughs]  That's a great way to spend your money on something 
that is not gonna be bad for your health ' well, depends I guess. [laughs]  Obey the 
speed limit.   
 
So, did you have any role models in your life who smoked or used tobacco?  
 
SP:  My mom. My mom, she ' I tell ya, it's almost embarrassing when I  say this. My mom 
has had four heart attacks. My mom has 22% heart function currently. She's alive. But 
my mom had me in high school, so if I'm 39, my mom is fifty... she's not even 60, I mean, 
she's in her fifties. And yeah, I mean, this is ' this is a st ory, unfortunately, of systemic 
tobacco use, you know. And like I say, just not taking care of ourselves like we should. 
But my mom has been my role model my whole life, you know. And I love my mom. My 
dad was not a part of my life. She was it. So she was great. And seeing her smoke was 
normal. She tried to hide it at first when we were young, but then as we got older, she 
just kinda just smoked, and I thought it was normal. I always wanted to sneak her 
cigarettes, but I never did. But it was just part of t he culture, I guess. It was just what it 
was.    
CH:  And so that had an impact on you as far as...  
 
SP:  I would definitely say as far as my decision -making to become a smoker, it made me feel 
far more comfortable to smoke. It made me feel fine with it, and especially when I knew 
that at 17, I could be a smoker, I could home and my mom wouldn't smell it because she 
smoked. So she wouldn't even notice, and that made me feel more comfortable with it, 
which is unfortunate.   
 
CH:  Right. Well, I'm glad that y our mother is doing well. So, what does it mean to you, then, 
to be a role model to your son and to others as someone who does not smoke, some 
who has quit smoking?   
 
SP:  You're not the first person to ask me this, and I say that because my kid's school h ad me 
come and talk to them about this, because of the commercial and they saw it, and we, 
they, however you wanna put it , had a problem. Kids, it was in fifth grade this past year, 
they busted, I wanna say in his class alone, five kids that brought vapes to school. And 
they knew it was an issue, and at first, I guess, when they approached me, because I'm 
super involved at school, you know, and they approached me with it and they were like, 
"Look," you know, they were like, "I know this is weird," but I usu ally do the fire 
program and all that, and they were like, "Could you talk to them about not smoking?" 
And they were like, "More not vaping than anything." You guys, by the way, were 
instrumental in that as well. Sent me a bunch of stuff to take to the kid s, so thank you.   
 
CH:  Great!  
 
SP:  I was able to leave them with some materials. Yeah, and I was able to talk to them, and 
it's one of those things, you know, as far as being a role model, that's something that we 
talked about, is, I asked them, I said, you know, "How many of you guys know someone 
that vapes?" And I would say 65% of the class raised their hands. And it's people that 
they look up to. So it's hard because I see myself in that. You know, when I was a kid, my 
mom, she smoked and it was normal . So it's so important for us as parents, as adults, 
just to make sure that we're going out of our way to make sure that we're showing 
these kids that you don't have to do this to be cool, and just because the vape smoke 
goes away real fast, that doesn't m ean that it's acceptable. It's not ' it's not cool. So I 
know that they said that it got better after the talk. It didn't stop. It's again, like I said, 
it's a fight. You know, I mean, here we are with kids that are 10, 11 years old who are 
now addicted to  vapes. So it's a new ' new fight, but yeah, being a role model means 
keeping that fight going. This isn't a war that we're gonna win here today or tomorrow 
or next week. We gotta dig our heels in and we gotta fight for it, so.   
 
CH:  Just changing your ow n behavior can impact generations of people. That's something 
that I find really profound as role modeling.   
 
SP:  You know, 100% true. Again, with myself as case in point, I have my mom who has a 
heart problem. I have a heart problem. And unfortunately my  son may be predisposed 
to having a heart problem as well, you know. And he can be the one to break the cycle. 
He can be the one that says, "Okay, here I am, I'm third generation. I can say no to smoking. I can say no, I don't want this tobacco in my life, " and he can be the one that 
starts that new healthy chain. It just takes one.  
 
CH:  Well, so, what would you like to say to people who haven't quit yet but might need 
some inspiration?  
 
SP:  I would say what I wish somebody would have said to me years ago . Don't be ashamed. 
Know that it's gonna be hard and that you're gonna falter. There's gonna be times 
where you're gonna screw up. There's gonna be the time after that Thanksgiving meal 
where you're super full and you're like, "Oh my gosh, I just gotta hav e a smoke." There's 
gonna be moments. But when you set it in your mind, and when you believe in yourself, 
and when you know 'I'm ready,' it's time. And to... I would say to anyone, use the 
tobacco helpline. Please call the helpline. Find me on Facebook and  message me. I don't 
care. Find someone. Get an accountabilibuddy. Call the helpline though. Use them. I 
know, I've done it before, I called as recently as just a few months ago. I mean, it's 
nothing to be ashamed of. And I know ' I'm a big guy. I'm a fire fighter, I mean, I'm a lot 
of things to a lot of people, but I also know that I'm not too tough, I'm not too strong to 
say, "I need help." So I think that's probably the biggest thing, is just knowing you can 
admit that you just need a hand, and that it's acceptable. It's nothing to be ashamed of. 
Like I said earlier, we are always in recovery as former smokers, and it's just something 
that sometimes we just have to reach out. Don't be ashamed.   
 
CH:  I have one more question. What is it specifically about the helpline that you found so 
helpful to you?  
 
SP:  No judgment. No judgment is my favorite thing. You know, when you call your buddy, 
depending on who your buddy is, you know, you call your buddy, you call your friend, 
you call up your sister, your mothe r, and you say to them, "Man, I really wanna smoke," 
they, depending on if they have that enabling personality, they might say, "Well, just 
have one, it's okay," or they may say, "Man, stop," you know, they may cuss at you, be 
like, "Dude, you're wasting m y time, whatever." But you know with the helpline you're 
not gonna get that. With the helpline, you're always gonna get somebody who is gonna 
be like, "Look, I understand, I've been there," and someone who is gonna give you that 
conversation that you need,  even if you just need to have sounding board so you can 
complain, they'll take it, and then they'll help you. I would say that's probably the 
biggest thing is there is no judgment there. It's almost like you have a random friend 
that you can call that's j ust going to be there.   
 
CH:  That's really great insight. Thank you so much, Shaun, for being with us today and 
sharing your experience. We really appreciate it and a lot of us really need it right now, 
so thank you for what you do.   
 
SP:  Hey, thank you so much for giving me ' I mean, this has been a true blessing. Like I 
said, you guys have been a blessing to me, you guys have given me a platform to be able 
to share this with so many people, strangers, et cetera, and I thank you.   
 
[46:34 ]  
 JT:  Wow, Cate, you were right, Shaun is a great guy. I really enjoyed listening to the 
conversation. He sounds just so committed to telling others about the benefit and 
health of quitting tobacco. That was great.  
 
CH:  Yeah, it was really cool, 'cause,  I mean, quitting tobacco not only changed his life for the 
better with regard to his health, but it also really gave him, like, a passion and a new 
direction to help other people quit. And so that's always really nice to hear, and 
especially when he got s o much benefit from the helpline, which has helped thousands 
of people like Shaun.   
 
JT:  Yeah, that's true! That's true. I mean, people can get free lozenges and gum and free 
coaching, text messages, all kinds of things, Cate.  
 
CH:  Yeah. I think it's cra zy. I mean, we have all this right here. You can call 1 -800-QUIT -NOW 
or you can go to OKHelpline.com, whatever you're more comfortable with. If you wanna 
talk to someone over the phone, they're there. If you wanna chat with someone over 
the internet, they' re there. If you wanna get two weeks' free supply of lozenges and 
gum and patches, you can get them shipped to you. It's crazy. It's just such a great 
resource. And like he said, he said there's no judgment there. There's just the person 
who all they wanna  do is just help you quit and help you improve your life. That's a 
really remarkable service.   
 
JT:  That's such a good point. I mean, a lot of people who may be using tobacco who really 
wanna quit, they know that it's not good for your health and, you kno w, they know this 
already. They don't need to feel like they're being judged, you know, they just want 
help. No judgment, right?  
 
CH:  Right.  
 
JT:  And as you mentioned earlier in the podcast, with the pandemic going on, with the 
coronavirus going around, it really does add another reason to quit tobacco. It's hard, 
it's really hard, but the resources are there. The support is there. And it's great to hear 
people like Shaun who are so passionate about it too.   
 
CH:  Yeah, well, and just acknowledging that w hether you like it or not, you are a role model. 
Kids, grandkids, students, neighbors ' you are a role model, and so your behavior does 
impact the people around you, and if you're taking this pandemic seriously, you know, 
you are taking your health serious ly, now is the absolute perfect time to quit tobacco, 
and you can have a ripple effect on those around you.  
 
JT:  Yeah, good point. You know, we are very happy to observe No Menthol Sunday coming 
up, and there are other tobacco holidays throughout the year . Great American 
Smokeout, World No Tobacco Day will be at the end of this month on May 31st, and 
other days. So those days come and go, and they give us great reasons to quit, and the 
coronavirus of course is another great reason to quit. But we will get through this 
pandemic. It will get better. It really will. But one thing that won't change is how we are 
as role models. We want to be our best for our kids, our grandkids, for other people 
who see us, who look up to us, and so from a role modeling standpo int, there's always yet another good reason, no matter what day it is, to reach out and get help if you need 
it.  
 
I enjoyed this podcast, Cate! What did you think?  
 
CH:  Yeah! I did too. It was fun. I learned about cool people doing cool things, cool 
organizations ' yeah. Had a blast. Thanks, James.   
 
JT:  Absolutely. And with that, we do want to thank Dr. Adam Alexander and Theo Noel and 
Shaun Pryor for their time and the ir information and their insights, and we are always so 
very thankful to you, our podcast listeners.   
 
CH:  Thank you.   
 
JT:  And so until n ext time, this is James Tyree  ' 
 
CH:  ' and Cate Howell.   
 
JT:  Wishing you peace  '  
 
CH:  ' and Better H ealth.   
 
[Theme  music]  
 
[50:33]  TSET Better Health Podcast Transcript  
Episode 4: Farmers Markets and Summer Nutrition  
June 17, 2020  
Summary: Better Health is bringing healthy, local food to you in this episode. Your hosts James 
and Cate explore the sights, sounds and people at the Scissortail Park Farmers Market, have an 
informative conversation with Abbey Owens, Meredith Scott and Jade Owen of  the Oklahoma Nutrition 
Information and Education (ONIE) Project, and dive into the story of Shelby Sieg, chef at Lua 
Mediterranean and Bottle Shop and a featured chef with Shape Your Future. Tune in to learn more 
about local farmers markets and the import ance of nutrition al food for the body and soul.  
 [Theme music]  
[0:15 ] 
James Tyree : Hey, hello, everybody. We are here at the farmers market at Scissortail Park  in 
Okla homa City. This is James Tyree of TSET.  
Cate Howell : And this is Cate Howell, health communication intern.  
JT: And welcome to the TSET Better Health Podcast ! 
CH: It is so beautiful outside right now. A little warm, but ' 
JT:  Yes. 
CH:  [laughs ] But there' s so many people out and great local foods to look from. Tell us some 
conversations that you've had, James.  
JT:  I've had conversations with farmers ' there are farmers here who've come from miles, 
miles away to come here because this is such a vibrant mar ket and they are pretty 
excited to be here on this beautiful day. I've talked with shoppers, people who've come 
from near and far just to find all kinds of really, really fresh foods and other types of 
items here. As you said, Cate, it's a really beautiful  day and so people are happy to be 
here. And so you not only get shopping for nutritious foods, but you get people who are 
pretty jovial because they're pretty happy to be here. It's a great atmosphere here.  
CH:  And so this was formerly the OSU -OKC farmer s market, right?  
JT: That is correct. It was there for a long time. It moved here to Scissortail Park, and they 
were going to have a grand opening today, but they're going to push it back just because 
there's so much going on in the world around us and stuff. But it's hard to tell that  it's 
not a grand opening , because it's opening  here and it's grand. [laughs]   So in this podcast, we will hear from Mary Bixler, who kind of coordinates this farmers 
market. You'll hear from farmers and customers who are here in terms of why they like 
being here. You will hear from people from ONIE, Oklahoma Nutrition Information 
Education , in terms of what they do for nutritious foods, farmers markets, all kinds of 
stuff throughout the state. And I hear that you had a pre tty righteous interview too.  
CH:  Yeah, we're going to talk to Shelby Sieg. She was our featured chef with Shape Your 
Future. We recorded a video  with her that'll be available on  the website, but we also got 
a little background into who she is, her story, why she chose to be a chef and the 
background of the Lua r estaurant in the Plaza District as well.  
JT:  Oh really?  
CH: Yeah.  
JT:  How cool is that?  
CH:  Very cool.  
JT:  [laughs ] Very, very nice. Okay, well, enjoy the sights and sounds of this farmers market , 
and we will get right to Mary Bixler. I had a chance to talk with her a little bit ago right 
before the market opened , and so here are her comments.  
[02:50]  
JT:  Alright! He llo Mary, how are ya?  
Mary Bixler:  I'm v ery good. How are you , James ? 
JT:  Pretty good. We're here at Scissortail. What's it like? It's the grand opening, so what are 
we expecting today?  
MB:  Absolutely. So we did change our grand opening ceremony just a little bit in light of 
everything that's going on socially. We didn't feel like it was exactly the appropriate time 
to be celebrating when there's a lot of reflection and, you know, intentional thinking. So 
we wanted to scale back a little bit on our grand  opening and just provide a safe space 
for folks with some music. We will have a few remarks from our CEO this morning, 
Maureen Heffernan, that'll be a little later.  
So we added a couple of vendors this week, so we have a couple more produce folks, 
but yo u can also expect to see lots of plants, lots of ready -to-eat food. We have a few 
artisan folks, so we have some folks that are making some really cool stuff with local 
products. We also have Oklahoma State University passing out resources for their 
horticultural program , as well as Hunger Free Oklahoma . They're with us this morning, 
and they're passing out resources for SNAP (Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program) 
and resources for how folks have been affected financially with COVID, as well as some 
recipes and nutritional assistance programs.  So that's basically what you'll see here today. So, a little bit scaled back on th e grand 
opening but we're still, you know, really really blessed with such a beautiful space. We 
felt like it might be more appropriate to have a celebration maybe at the end of the 
season and kind of wanted to show our solidarity with everything going on right now.  
JT:  Okay. So, for a scaled back event, it still sounds like there's a lot going on here. There are 
so many places to shop for food s and  items; why should people come here?  
MB:  Great question. Yes, we do have a lot of folks with us. With our in creased safety 
precautions, we needed to limit the numbers at first, but now we're steadily increasing 
to accommodate more of our members.  
The really , really beautiful thing about local food systems is that, you know, we look at 
this as an environmental aspect, but it really encompasses economic and social equity. 
So when we're able to purchase from folks who are growing and making their products 
locall y, we're keeping that money circulated in the Oklahoma economy, and we're lifting 
up local  small business owners. And as far as quality of food, you can tell a difference 
once you taste any of these items. It is different. These are value -added , nutrient -dense 
products. Most of these products are not coming from any further than 50 miles, so 
thinking about that as far as environmental, that's so much less 'food miles' we call it, 
because with planes and vehicles, there's a lot of emissions it takes for our food to get to 
our grocery store and then to the consumer. So the food miles are much, much shorter. 
The growing practices are also significantly better, and these folks are paying their 
workers as they should be. They're providing a working atmosphere tha t is not 
exploitative to the environment, to the land or to people that usually work the land that 
in those large -scale farming operations can be, you know, not the greatest working 
situations.  
It's such a wonderful experience to be able to talk to people  that grow and make your 
food or your items, and that kind of feedback is very unique to a farmers market in that 
you're asking people and you're getting that feedback and you're learning versus just 
picking it up off the shelf. There's so much more connec tion to the land and how that's 
grown or how that's made. So it's just a lot of multifaceted but really holistic and in the 
way that we look at food.  
JT:  And finally, I guess TSET and Shape Your Future will have a partnership here. What's that 
going to be  about?  
MB:  Yeah, we are very, very excited for that partnership. So what we've started to do is TSET 
and Shape Your Future are sponsoring our Farmers Market Cooking Series . So, right now 
what that looks like, given everything with COVID, is we are digitally making a video of 
local chefs in the community that are using seasonal ingredients to make a healthy meal 
that's filling, fun for the family to get involved in, but also workabl e on a budget, and so 
we're looking at SNAP guidelines. We ha ve an awesome recipe book that' s like 'how to 
have great recipes and filling meals on four dollars a day.'  So we're showing folks how to prepare these items. It can be really overwhelming when 
you come to a farmers market and you see so many things that you don't know what to 
do with them, or how to utilize a whole plant, like the greens on carrots or beets, and so 
we're having these chefs show us little tricks on how to make sauces or how to mak e 
stock with those extra bits, as well as ways to cook these ingredients where you get the 
most flavor and nutrient density.  
So we're going to be airing those videos digitally on our social media, and then when 
we're able to do live cooking demos, we're g oing to have those chefs come over and do 
this live, and then folks be able to get the ingredients at the market to make those 
recipes at home.  
JT:  Excellent.  
MB:  It's very great.  
JT:  Well, thank you Mary. I appreciate it so much. It's s o nice having yo u here on the 
podcast.  
MB:  Thank you. I so appreciate you all being here.  
 [07:27]  
JT:  Well, as I mentioned, earlier this week, a few days ago, we were able to catch up with 
Meredith Scott, Abbey Owens and Jade Owen of the ONIE Project, and they are fant astic 
to speak to because they are very involved with agribusiness and farmers markets and 
spreading nutrition to Oklahomans throughout the state. So we were able to catch up 
with them. I think we had a really good conversation. Would you like to hear it n ow, 
Cate?  
CH:  Yeah, let's roll it. [laughs]  
JT:  Alright.  
 [07:56]  
Meredith Scott: Hi, I'm Meredith Scott , and I'm the ONIE program manager.  
Jade Owen:  Hello, I'm Jade Owen, and I am ONIE's community outreach coordinator.  
Abbey Owens:  I'm Abbey Owens. I  am ONIE's operations coordinator.  
JT:  Very good to have you guys. Thank you for your time with us, too. We really appreciate 
it.  
Just to get started, can you tell us , in a nutshell , what is ONIE? What does it stand for? 
What's your mission? And what are  your main programs and activities?  MS:  Well, ONIE stands for Oklahoma Nutrition Information Education Project . We are 100% 
grant -funded. We have started out primarily as a SNAP education program, but 
throughout the years, we've grown into a lot of other different projects as we've 
received other grants. But our main goal is to make the healthy choice the easy cho ice, 
and that's what all of our program s are focused in on. That's honestly how we got 
involved with farmers markets. We saw that vegetables at farmers markets are the best 
they can be, and we wanted to give all Oklahomans access to that quality food. So w e 
started working with farmers markets to help improve that access through SNAP and 
other tools.  
So that's a little bit about us. We do have different projects, but we do, of course, love 
our farmers market initiative.  
JT:  Well, how exactly does ONIE supp ort and promote farmers markets, not only for the 
farmers and producers, but also for people out there, the consumers?  
AO:  Each year, we host the annual Oklahoma Farme rs Market and Agritourism Conference  in 
partnership with ODAFF  (Oklahoma Department of Agriculture, Food and Forestry). This 
conference helps bring together around 500+ growers, producers, agritourism sites and 
support organizations to network, gain new skills, learn new information, and really just 
come together to have a conversation about agriculture in the state. We also offer 
technical support. We also offer marketing support for farmers markets like signage , as 
well as digital marketing such as social media promotion. On top of that, for consumers, 
we offer different resources to help bring consumers into the markets and make the 
markets more family -friendly. Some of these are in -season recipe cards to help promote 
especially crops. So yeah, those are some of the things we offer to help support farmers 
markets.  
JT:  Where can farmers and consumers find this information?  
AO:  We definitely have a lot of resources on our website, ONIEproject.org, but we also 
provide recipe cards and recipe stands and maybe some other resources like scavenger 
hunts or how to do this family event like a cooking demo to help make the market more 
of an event rather than just a grocery shopping experience.  
JT:  Nice. I will say that  one that one of my personal favorite resource that you guys have, 
every year ONIE puts out a calendar, and we always get that calendar because it has a ll 
these great recipes and such for it.  
AO:  And we definitely provide those to different farmers market s as well.  
JT:  Yesterday, my daughter flipped the calendar because it's a new month now, and she 
saw orange cashew chicken and she's looking forward to actually making it, so there you 
go.  Can you tell us about farmers markets throughout the state? Do you know about how 
many there are, and what about them makes them similar when you go from place to 
place, and what are some differences that can make each one kind of unique?  
JO:  So right now there are over 90 farmers markets registered in the state of O klahoma, and 
ONIE has worked with markets all across the state from Miami to Frederick in all 
different corners. Of course, at every market you're going to find people who are very, 
very passionate about their farms, the produce that they're selling, as we ll as their 
community. One of my favorite things about farmers markets is when you go to one, 
you really get a vibe of what that community's like, what their values are. Farmers 
markets really do foster a sense of community connectedness.  
JT:  Of course, t his year has kind of been unlike any other in recent memory with the 
pandemic going on. Can you tell us a little how farmers markets throughout the state 
have had to adjust during the midst of this pandemic?  
JO:  So the good news is Oklahoma farmers market s are open to serve their customers. They 
are all following suggested safety guidelines, so vendors are wearing masks and gloves, 
practicing frequent hand -washing. The markets are also setting up sanitation and hand -
washing stations. We're also seeing an i ncrease in utilization of social media websites by 
our farmers markets. A few farmers markets have recently expanded to online markets 
where consumers can order directly from the market vendors and come and pick up 
their orders curbside at the typical farm ers market. So that's another way to ensure 
safety and limit contact.  
 We've seen a significant shift in the local food movement during the pandemic as well. 
Grocery stores were running out of staple food items like bread, eggs and fresh produce 
that they typically receive from out -of-state distributors, and what was awesome is 
many of our farmers and farmers markets had these items readily available, so 
consumers were able to find these items by shopping at their local farmers markets. 
And when you buy loc al, the best thing about shopping at markets is you are talking to 
the person who grew that item, who made it, so you're really helping to shorten the 
food supply chain to help ensure food safety as well as promote the local economy.  
JT:  It seems like far mers markets really have been a benefit even more so during this very 
unusual time . 
JO:  For sure. They've been able to keep Oklahoma families fed with healthy produce and 
fresh products.  
JT:  Well, ONIE has been around for a little while now. Can you kind  of describe how farmers 
markets have grown in recent years, and then in the other direction, what is there to 
look forward to in the future?  
MS:  Well James, there's lots of opportunities, and we really have seen some major growth in 
our farmers markets. We've been working for farmers markets for nearly a decade now 
directly, and we've seen more farmers markets open. We've also seen the capacity of the farmers markets grow, seei ng new vendors with new ideas, l ike Jade mentioned, the 
online shopping, and we  see a lot of future opportunity with that. We are really helping 
people identify new vendors and new opportunities to create the grocery store 
experience at the farmers market where you can buy the complete, everything you 
need right at the farmers market . We know that there's many vendors that don't know 
they're vendors yet. We have a lot of backyard farmers that grow too much, and they 
can make a profit as well as support their community by selling at the farmers market.  
And so we're seeing new technolo gies being implemented to where we're opening 
opportunities for a new customer base. The Millennials that would typically not go to 
the farmers market, but now they can shop online for the farmers market, are now 
engaging. And so we're seeing a lot of oppo rtunity for growth with the use of 
technology as well as getting more people to grow and sell as well as make products or 
farm.  
JT:  I do know, as you guys very well know, TSET is very interested in helping people to eat 
better, to eat more nutritious foods, especially fruits and vegetables and other things, 
and so we're very interested in all aspects of this, including farmers markets. At 
ShapeYourFutureOK.com, we have an area , farmers markets , with this information and 
such, and we have really enjoyed working with ONIE, not only our agency, but also TSET 
Healthy Living Program grantees partnering with ONIE and your resources. So we just 
want to thank you for that.  
MS:  Well,  we really enjoy working with you guys and we love that we share similar missions 
and that we try to complement each other the best we can to grow both of our 
programs and strengthen the quality of  food for Oklahomans for sure.  
And we wanted to mention , if you're looking for farmers markets, there's obviously lots 
of different opportunities to find those markets. Both our websites, Shape Your Future's 
website  and ONIE Project website , have information. We also have  ' Loklahoma  lists all 
the outlets that you could find local food.  
And if you're interested in being a vendor or, you know, you're starting to grow or you 
want to help support your farmers market, we also host the Oklahoma Farmers Market 
Facebook page. It's Oklaho ma Farmers Market s. That gives a lot of resources for those 
who are wanting to help support the farmers market on more the backend side.  
JT:  Right, good information. Thank you so much, and thank you all for your time. We really 
appreciate it. You brought some really good information that people can enjoy , and 
thank you.  
MS, JO, AO:  Thank you for having us.  
 [17:11]  
CH:  Wow, cool. Thank you, James, for that awesome interview.  JT:  Yeah, they've been great to work with. I have ' over the past few years, TS ET and ONIE 
have worked together and they've been fantastic to work with, and so I'm glad that we 
were able to discuss that.  
I had an opportunity to speak with some people here, vendors, shoppers of all sorts, and 
it's been a lot of fun.  
CH:  Cool, let's g o talk to them.  
JT:  Okay.  
 [17:38]  
McKnight:  I'm [inaudible] McKnight and I'm from Oklahoma City.  
Angelia Watley: I'm Angelia Watley from Oklahoma City as well.  
 Well, I come out to the farmer's market for freshness. They have fresh produce, it's 
beaut iful, it's clean, it's healthy. I love to eat healthy. I love the green onions. They're 
sweet, d elicious. A nd eggs. They have crafted pretzels. I have the original, which is ranch 
and garlic mix. I also support the Sage and Elm Apothecary  for her bubble bath soap. Her 
soaps and oils, body oils are wonderful . I also support the Signature sweet t reats where I 
have the tomato basil and cream cheese pastry pi e. Delicious. And also the natural fruit 
popsicles, because baby, it's hot out here, but you can't beat coming if you come early in 
the morning.  
MK:  The reason why I came is to support Oklahoma City parks and to support the vendors. 
This is a great place to come on Saturday mornings to walk and enjoy the sunshine and 
the great weather that we're having right now. They have great fruits and vegetables for 
you to buy that you don't buy from the store, so you don't have all the pesticide, and it's 
coming stra ight from the garden. And what I bought today was a pie that was made 
from Signature Bakery  over here, and then I bought some plants, some annuals that I'm 
going to plant when I get home. I bought some pr etzels. And all these things are made in 
Oklahoma, right here. And so the flavor is there, you don't have to worry about too 
much processing because it's all made right here.  
Peyton Keith:  Peyton Keith from Midwest City.  
Desiree Keith:  Desiree Keith from Midwest City.  
PK:  We came out the first weekend that they were open and we saw they had a lot of fresh 
stuff out. It wasn't very big, and then we heard that they were getting a little bit bigger 
and have some more stuff, so we came back out to see what th ey had.  
DK:  So I bought a big old bag full of squash today. They had zucchini squash and some really 
cute , fun varieties that look funny that I've never tried before, so I'm going to try 
something new. I might just saut' them up and throw them on a side f or dinner. I'm really looking forward to when we get some berries, strawberries and peaches and 
things like those in season, so that'll probably come later but I keep hoping it'll be here 
this weekend.  
PK:  I like interacting with some of the  people who kn ow a little more about the food and 
also the whole idea of supporting the farmers that are here rather than wherever else 
they come from and just getting the freshest stuff that we can.  
DK:  Shopping local, you know, being outside, having a good time, gett ing a little sunshine, 
and just seeing also what is in season at the moment, 'cause when you go to the grocery 
store, they could be getting that from anywhere and, you know, oranges aren't in 
season year round. But when you come to the farmers market, you know you're getting 
what's in season right then that week.  
Rod Ardoin:  My name is Rod Ardoin and I'm with Acadian Family Farm . I'm a Cajun from south 
Louisiana, and so we come from a long history of food. We like to eat good food, if you 
know anything about Louisiana food. My grandparents raised a big garden. It's just in us 
down there. A lot of the older people the community ra ised gardens. And we just like to 
enjoy life and eat good.  
Oh, we have about everything. We have organic carrots, organic radishes, kohlrabi, 
green and red lettuce, kale, oriental turnips, everything that help the people have a 
healthy diet.  
You know, we' re actually three miles from Fort Cobb Lake. It's about 80 miles. So we 
have to get up really early in the morning and load our trucks.  
Everybody knows, you know, to eat a really good healthy diet, you need a lot of 
vege tables in your diet, you know. A nd so that's one reason I think that people are 
looking for vegetables because they know they're healthy. I mean, I don't know if 
anybody disputes eating vegetables being healthy.  
I used to rodeo when I was young and it's a lot like a rodeo in some aspects. You know, 
you come in, you set up, you have a big event, and afterwards everybody goes home. 
You know, and maybe we, through the excitement, kind of encourage people to eat 
right, you know? Because there's lots of things out there that encourage you to eat  
wrong, you know what I'm saying? So it can have a positive influence in that aspect. I 
think a lot of people who come to farmers markets don't really eat healthy normally. I 
think they come because it's a special event or whatever, and maybe we can have s ome 
kind of influence on them when they go back and maybe they'll start trying to eat 
healthier.  
[21:58]  
JT:  Cate, I had so much fun talking with these people and interviewing them and hearing 
their experiences and why they're here, and it's pretty exciti ng. You come here and there are so many other stories of people and their backgrounds and why they're here 
and it's really exciting.  
 But you got to hear and talk with a particular chef . Is that right?  
CH:  I did.  Shelby Sieg. She hung out with us at Shape  Your Future and taught us how to make 
a really , really awesome salad with fresh ingredients, and I got to talk to her a little bit 
about her background and why it's important to know where your food comes from and 
to have those fresh ingredients.  
JT:  I would really like to hear it.  
CH:  Let's play it.  
JT:  Alright!  
[22:48]   
[Music: Yerbaguena by Gnawledge from Free Music Archive ] 
CH:  A soothing contrast of burnt rose  colored walls and vibrant green succulents greets 
patrons who enter Lua Mediterranean and Bottle Shop in the Plaza District in Oklahoma 
City. Between the bar top and mirrored shelves, the chef prepares a salad.  
Shelby Sieg:  [background] Today, we're goin g to make a fresh summer salad featuring a lot of items 
that come from farmers markets'  
 My name is Shelby Sieg, and  I am the chef and operating partner of Lua  Mediterranean 
and Bottle Shop in the heart of the Plaza District. Just really focusing on fresh, seasonal, 
local ingredients and cocktails and wines that reflect the Mediterranean vibe as well.  
CH:  Shelby and her associates have traveled all over the wor ld seeking out unique dishes to 
bring back to Oklahoma City, but they have also shared the wisdom of those with 
worldly experience right here at home.  
SS:  We actually have a lady named  Mrs. Moses that is a local teacher. She came in and 
helped us with the  hummus recipe and it's a Lebanese kind of style hummus. That's a 
recipe that she's really handed out over th e years to different students, s o it was a kind 
of a cool way to get some local influence and somebody that a lot of people would 
know.  
 [backgroun d chatter and laughter]  
 I think it's really important to know where your food comes from if you can, if you have 
access to a farmers market. When you have access to those foods, when you can see the 
people that grow those foods and the hands that were on it and where it comes from, I 
think it makes you want to focus a little bit more on what you're putting into your body when you see kind of the whole process from start to finish, because really kind of 
having that connection for me makes it all full circl e. 
I think that sometimes , it sounds like it's a very hard t hing to eat healthy. It's maybe a 
little bit more expensive or you have to really, really know how to cook or what you're 
doing. And that's really a fallacy, because you can just go to your local market, pick 
whatever vegetables are available and in season, just kind of adding really, really fresh 
things. Especially in spring and summer when everything is really available and in 
season, putting together cold salads and putting maybe vegetables on s kewers on the 
grill, things that are really, really easy to do but fill your plate with a lot of fresh fruits 
and vegetables.  
[background] So the cooking time on the quinoa is about 20 to 25 minutes depending on 
how much'  
CH:  Food is a living metaphor of what we absorb from our world. It's such a fundamental 
part of life, and it can be intimately impactful and memorable.  
SS:  Some of my favorite times growing up were, you know, when we were preparing for any 
kind of party around my house and having a bunch  of my parents' friends over, anything 
like that. My mom really just went to a lot of trouble putting together these really 
amazing , elaborate men us. A nd for me, those times, my sisters and I in the kitchen with 
my mom and she would be teaching us about me nus and recipes that her mom had 
made from a collection of recipe books that she had gotten from around the country 
and different friends of hers.  
My dad was in the Air Force, so we moved around a lot, and it was always really, really 
cool to kind of rela te to people through those recipes and through food because I think 
it kind of demystifies different cultures and different populations when you approach it 
through food. So she, you know, she really would teach us a lot about, you know, 'In this 
country, this is the way this food is eaten and this is the way it's made,' and it makes it 
to where it's not quite so kind of weird and foreign when you're a kid to think about 
other cultures, and you get a really cool experience of kind of approaching it through 
something that everyone can relate to.  
[background] And that's it. So there you just have a really beautiful, light, fresh summer 
salad featuring ingredients that you can get at Scissortail Farmers Market.  
[26:49]  
CH:  So we just spoke with Shelby Sieg, a nd I love that interview because we got to know 
more about why food is such a personal thing. Everyone has memories, family 
memories, memories of friends, special occasions , that are really closely tied with food. 
And so not only is it about your health an d your nutrition, but there's a very kind of 
personal and even spiritual aspect to it as well. What do you think?  JT:  I think you're right. You know, food nourishes us obviously, but it's also a source of 
enjoyment. You know, we are made to enjoy our food, enjoy the taste, enjoy the 
experience of dining together with friends and such, and so just incorporating all those 
elements of nutrition and enjoyment and the social aspect , it comes together very, very 
well.  
Speaking of nutrition and social , we're  here at Scissortail Park ! 
CH:  [laughs]  
JT:  ' for the farmers market here, and things are really revving up. There are still a lot of 
people here who are milling around. They are social distancing and they're wearing 
masks, so that's good. But there's so  many vendors here, so much stuff. But you know, 
Cate, this is only one of many farmers markets throughout the state, and on 
ShapeYourFutureOK.com, there is a page there that has a lot of information on farmers 
markets. So I invite you to visit ShapeYourFu tureOK.com. Go to I think it's the healthy 
eating tab. You click on that. There'll be a farmers market dealio. Click on that, and you'll 
get a wealth of information about a bunch of farmers markets throughout the state. So 
come here to Scissortail P ark or go to any farmers market  throughout the state.  
CH:  Yes. It is so nice here at Scissortail Park. We're having a great time at this farmers 
market. They are on every Saturday, right? Starting this Saturday. So come on out when 
you can. You'll get produce fr om all over the state, from the farm straight to your table, 
you know where it comes from, you know it's organic, and you're supporting local in a 
time when we really need to support each other and band together as a community. So 
this is a great place to be, great thing to support.  
So James, this has been such an awesome episode, such a cool experience. Thank you 
for coming out with me today.  
JT:  I've had a wonderful time too, Cate. Come on out , and thank you for your interviews. 
Thank you for your time. Listeners, thank you for your time. I hope you really enjoyed 
this.  
So until next time, this is James Tyree  ' 
CH:  ' and Cate Howell.  
JT:  Wishing you peace  '  
CH:  ' and Better Health.  
 [Them e music]  
 [29:47]  TSET Better Health Podcast Transcript  
Episode 5 : Rural Health Care and PMTC  
July 20 , 2020  
Summary: James and Cate head to McAlester to take a look at rural health care and the 
importance of the TSET -funded Physician Manpower Training Commission (PMTC) during COVID -19. 
Janie Thompson, PMTC executive director, and Michelle Mabray, physician recruiter at M cAlester 
Regional Health Center, discuss how PMTC incentivizes physicians to practice at rural hospitals through 
medical student loan debt forgiveness. David Keith, CEO of McAlester Regional Health Center provides a 
bird's -eye view of the state of rural he alth care in Oklahoma during the pandemic  and the crucial 
services his facility provides . Dr. Kamron Torbati, an award -winning PMTC physician, tells his story from 
life in California to the Marines and what brought him to  McAlester Regional . 
 [Theme music]  
[0:15]  
James Tyree : Hello, good day , and welcome to the TSET Better Healt h Podcast. This is James Tyree.  
Cate Howell : And Cate Howell.  
James : And we are today to discuss rural health and medicine.   
Cate : Yes, James. This is a really important and timely t opic to discuss right now, especially 
with the pandemic and everything that's going on, really evaluating the state of rural 
health care and access to it. As you well know, the voters of Oklahoma recently passed 
State Question 802 to expand Medicaid, and t he fact that it was even on the ballot really 
shows that a majority of Oklahomans are concerned about this particular topic and 
health care access. A nd a ccording to ProPublica, 9 rural hospitals have closed in 
Oklahoma in the last 10 years, and many others are  on life support , and they lack certain 
vital services.  
James :  That is so true. You know, data is showing ' information is showing that among 77 
Oklahoma counties, 72 of them have a shortage of primary care physicians throughout 
the county and another fou r have a shortage in at least part of those counties. So 76 out 
of 77 totally or partially have a shortage of primary care physicians.  
Cate :  And that's a big problem. I mean, when we're going into this unprecedented global crisis 
situation, you know, an d people can't even get their regular everyday medical needs 
met, you know? So this is a really important topic to explore as it affects many 
Oklahomans, and it's another area where TSET is making a difference. A key part of that 
is the Oklahoma Medical Lo an Repayment Program, which is a matching program that 
TSET funds through the Physician s Manpower Training Commission, or PMTC. Basically, 
it is designed to incentivize primary care physicians to practice in rural areas by covering 
up to $200,000 in student loan debt.  James :  That's right. The Physicians Manpower Training Commission, or PMTC as you say and we 
will hear throughout this podcast, works to put physicians and other health care workers 
in underserved areas, primarily rural areas, but also other places where there is a 
shortage. And we're fortunate to have PMTC executive director Janie Thompson, discuss 
this issue with us and about her agency and what we learned more about the state 
agency in general and the medical loan repayment program in parti cular, including the 
community impacts that the TSET -supported program makes throughout the state.  
Cate :  We were really fortunate to be able to travel to southeast Oklahoma to talk about this 
with David Keith, the president and CEO of McAlester Regional H ealth Center. And we 
also were able to talk and kind of shine a light on a special physician down there in 
McAlester, Dr. Kamron Torbati, who just received the Rural Health Physician of the Year 
Award, and we got to know a little more about his personal jo urney that brought him 
from California and several years in the Marine Corps to when he decided to practice 
medicine and what then brought him and his family to McAlester , and he says he just 
couldn't be happier to be there. So that was exciting.  
James :  I think our listeners are going to appreciate that. He had a very compelling story, just 
about what brought him here and what he thinks about working and living here. So I 
think I think they'll enjoy that very much.  
Cate : Yeah.  
James :  Now, you'll also hear  our conversation with Michelle Mabry, who is McAlester Regional's 
physician recruiter. We happened to speak with her prior to our trip to McAlester, but 
she did share some of the challenges and also advantages of bringing doctors and health 
care workers t o rural areas.  
CH:  We are really excited to share these rural health care insights and personal exper iences 
from these great people, but let's start with a statewide kind of bird's -eye view 
perspective from Janie Thompson and the role that PMTC has played  in boosting 
medical access in our state.  
 [4:49]  
James:  We are here today with Janie Thompson. She is the executive director of Physician 
Manpower Training Commission, or PMTC, here in Oklahoma. Janie, thank you for 
joining us. It's wonderful to have you here.  
Janie Thompson: Thank you, James, for having me.  
James:  PMTC, of course, their mission is to increase access to medical care in rural and 
underserved areas. Can you talk a little bit about how great the need is for medical 
professionals in rural are as, and how does PMTC address this need?  
Janie:  I would be happy to, James. So,  the areas of rural Oklahoma, when  we listen to the news 
report the shortage of medical professionals all across the nation, even in our metropolitan areas. So you can imagine ho w much greater that need is in rural 
Oklahoma, simply because as physicians come out, in many instances, they're t rained in 
a metropolitan area, a nd so they 've become acclimated to those areas during that 
period of time, and so it becomes more of a challen ge to provide incentives to 
encourage them to relocate, often not just themselves, but their whole families to a 
rural area. And while we have a metropolitan areas that are also what we would call 
underserved areas, an underserved area  in rural is even gr eater because they're miles 
from a larger medical institution. And so, being able to have that provider right there for 
those emergency situations that happen ' and I think right now, we're becoming more 
and more aware of that with the crisis that we're in  with COVID -19.  
James:  Yeah.  
Janie:   Patients can't make those hour -long travels, or two hours in some cases, or even longer, 
in order to get medical care, and so it becomes very crucial. And, in rural areas, you have 
agricultur al accidents that happen t hat you've got  to have immediate care. We have an 
older population often times in our rural areas. So, it's vital that we address this for our 
state in particular. The way PMTC approaches that is that we have scholarship program s 
so that we begin to try to  start in that pipeline while they're still in residency to get them 
committed to go to a rural area and assist them financially as they're completing the ir 
training. And then we also have loan repayment. Loan repayment has become probably 
the number one d esire of those new physicians coming out, and even physicians that 
have been practicing four or five years. They still have loans coming out there. Education 
costs have gone up, and we've seen loans going up. Most of them range from $150 -
200,000. It's not unusual for us to have loans totaling $400,000.  
James:  Wow, wow.  
Janie:  So, this is a crucial factor in getting physicians to where we think in terms of what is 
going to be best for their families to help get them in a financial ly stable position.  
James:  This sounds like a very mutually beneficial program. I mean, obviously it benefits the 
communities greatly where these physicians go, but it also helps these physicians who 
just have all this incredible debt. Can you tell us about how many people ' how man y 
physicians have gone through the program?  
Janie:  When you look at all of our fellowship programs that we have had since the agency 
began in 1975 up to our current time frame where we now have loan repayment, 
physicians only (this is not counting programs  for physician assistants and our various 
nursing programs), over a thousand physicians have been assisted since 1975.  
James:  Wow, that's amazing. About how many are currently involved?  
Janie:  I can tell you, right now, on loan repayment, we have approxim ately 55 physicians on 
some form of loan repayment. And we also have about 15 physicians that are on a 
scholarship program. And many ' that does not count our physicians that are out in the 
field providing services to complete their service obligation.  James:  Wow. Your reach is amazing, it sounds like, and you mentioned PMTC has been around 
since 1975. Since then in more recent years, how has TSET entered the picture, and how 
does TSET help PMTC to accomplish this very important mission?  
Janie:  Well, in t he very beginning of loan repayment, it would not h ave actually initiated itself 
had TSET not stepped in. In 2012, the legislature passed legislation that allowed for loan 
repayments for physicians. But, of course, there wasn't funding to provide for th at. So it 
set for just a little bit until TSET and PMTC worked together to find a way of creating a 
grant for TSET to be able to help finance and sponsor loan repayment. It started out with 
financing 10 physician slots, and it was being matched with fe deral dollars through a 
Medicaid 1115 grant, and so it didn't require any type of state money to be involved in it 
as far as appropriations.  
James:  Wow.  
Janie:  And so, we were able to make that program survive from 2012 until 2018. And, of 
course, each year, TSET would provide 10 additional slot s until they were willing to ' 
their board could see what was being accomplished with the program, and allowed us to 
have 42 rolling slots. So, in other words, as a physician would come off of the program, 
we could fill that spot for the following fiscal year. The program was a maximum of 
$160,000, and so it paid in graduated amounts $25,000, $35,000, $45,000 and $5 5,000 
over a four year period.  
James:  It sounds like a lot of teamwork, a lot of collaboration to keep this great program going. 
Just dozens of physicians out there. That's great.  
 Well, with so many people who have gone through the program and communities 
throughout the state ' so many wonderful stories, I'm quite sure, but is there one that 
you can talk about briefly a s an example of just how great this works at the local level?  
Janie:  One that stands out in my mind just recently is Dr. Dylon Howard just began his practice 
in Ada, Oklahoma was Mercy in February of this year. Dr. Howard is from Oklahoma, but 
as often hap pens, his residency program was actually in North Carolina, so he has spent 
the last three years in North Carolina training for family medicine, and so sometimes it's 
difficult to get those physicians back once they leave.  
James:  Yeah.  
Janie:  This loan rep ayment program played a big part in getting Dr. Howard to relocate and 
come to Ada. At the same time, his sister -in-law was completing OB (obstetrics) training, 
and with him locating his family in Ada ' Mercy was also needing an OB -GYN ' and 
because of tha t, his brother and sister -in-law decided to relocate there as well. So 
because of loan repayment for Dr. Howard, Ada was also able to receive an OB/GYN. His 
brother is actually an Oklahoma Highway Patrol trooper, and so he now is stationed in 
Ada. And so t hat community has expressed just how great an impact that has been for 
them. They received two physicians, increased protection for their community , and all because of loan repayment being what brought Dr. Dylon Howard to Ada in the first 
place.  
James:  That's an incredible ripple effect there, Janie. I bet that happens quite a bit, too. That's 
terrific.  
Janie:  We often fail to look at the economic impact that physicians have on a community as 
well, because with physicians coming, more jobs are created to s upport that physician, 
all the way from the pharmacist to the hospital to the procedures. Often times in a rural 
community, a hospital is one of the largest employers in the community. And so, there is 
a huge impact that ev en just one physician can make o n a community.  
James:  That is so true, so true.  
Well, we've talked about PMTC's history and just the large impact that it's had over the 
past 45 years, and we've talked about the great things it's doing now, the lives and 
communities that are impacted. Could you share with us maybe anything that you're 
looking forward to looking ahead?  
Janie:  We have made some changes. R ecognizing the fact that we're competing against all the 
states around us, and, of course, Texas is one of our biggest competitors pulling our 
physicians away from Oklahoma to them. And so, having to re -evaluate  and think, 
'What can we do to make Oklahoma more competitive?'   
The decision was made to increase our total amount eligible to $200,000, and to make 
the payment where it's a flat $50,000 each year for four years as long as the physician 
owes at least $200,000. We're able to do that because the Oklahoma State Medical 
Association has come alongside us as well. They, too, are sponsoring and often teaming 
with TSET to assist us. So as we begin to expand our sponsorship and begin to blend 
other sponsors with our TSET sponsorship, it expands the number of opportunities we 
can provide for physicians, but then increasing it to $200,000 puts us in a much more 
competitive light. And that  begins with physicians starting their practice after July 1, 
2020. We have already recruited 12 new physicians to begin under that new program, 
and it's just now July. And so we're excited. We're already beginning to see what the 
future can hold as we inv est in that future.  
James:  Well, thank you for your time. We've really learned a lot about this very valuable 
program , and we appreciate the efforts that you and your staff put into this. Thank you, 
Janie.  
Janie:  You are welcome, James. Thank you for help ing us spread the word of what we have to 
offer.  
 [15:57]  
James:  You know, it's worth repeating Janie's point on the economic impact that each physician 
makes on his or her local economy. The TSET website cites The American Medical Association in saying t hat, 'each physician in Oklahoma supports an average of nearly 
12 jobs and $2 million in annual economic activity.' And you know what else? Janie also 
went on to tell me that physician and nurse placements from PMTC  truly  stretches 
throughout the entire state. S he said from Guymon down to Idabel, from Grove down to 
Altus, and everywhere in between , except in the Oklahoma City and Tulsa metro areas.  
Cate:  That's great. We experienced one of those places recently with our trip to McAlester, 
which is where we met Dr . Kamron Torbati, who is an OB -GYN, and he went through the 
PMTC program and ended up being placed in McAlester, and he says it has just been an 
immensely rewarding experience for him and he would not want his family anywhere 
else. So that was an interesti ng perspective that really showed that ripple effect that 
Janie Thompson described in her interview of how  that PMTC program impacts and 
affects not just the physician, but many other factors , so. 
James:  Let's hear that conversation. I'm really interested to share this with all of our listeners 
here . 
 [17:25]  
 [Blues music - Improvisation: Fast Blues in A by Reverend Gary Davis ] 
David Keith:  Here's wh at I know about Dr. Torbati.  
Cate:  That's David Keith, CEO of McAlester Regional Health Center.  
David:  I have yet to meet a patient that has said anything but fantastic things about his care. 
He's personable, and his skills are excellent. And besides tha t, he's a good friend and a 
good community member. What more can you ask for in a gentleman like that?  
Cate:  Dr. Kamron Torbati isn't someone you'd expect to see practicing obstetrics and 
gynecology in McAlester Oklahoma. B ut for the last five years, he's been providing elite 
reproductive health care to not just McAlester, but many nearby rural areas.  
Dr. Kamron Torbati: My name is Kamron Torbati. I'm an OB/GYN. I've been practicing in McAlester for 
the last five years.  
 You know, I'm new to Oklahoma. I was  born and raised in California. All of my medical 
education and training and residency and all that were in the northeast, so, you know, I 
was, I guess , a city kid.  
 You know, it wasn't always destined that I was gonna go into medicine. I enlisted in the 
Marine Corps right out of high school and my parents had to sign a permission slip for 
me to go. Joining the Marine Corps was probably the smartest decision I ever made. 
Through hard work and discipline, there's nothing you can't achieve in life , and there's  
no way in which you can't reinvent yourself. And it was during  that that I realized that I 
could do anything I wanted to, a nd, you know, I liked the idea of working with my hands, but a lso being able to help people. A nd I decided at that point that I was go ing to be a 
doctor, and the day I got out of the Marine Corps, I went about making it happen.  
Cate:  Kamron embarked on his medical journey about as far away from McAlester as 
someone could possibly be: the West Indies.  
Kamron:  I did two years of medical s chool in Grenada, so I lived there for a couple of years. I've 
traveled a lot throughout the U.S. I lived in the northeast for medical training, and then 
' me and my wife, we, prior to here, we were a little bit like nomads. We liked to 
experience new place s, but McAlester is where we've decided we're settling roots. 
We've been here five years with plans to stay for the foreseeable future.  
Cate:  While Kamron completed his residency in the northeast, his wife, Tiffany, gave birth to 
their son. It was then the y decided to leave the nomadic city -dweller life and find the 
perfect place to raise a family.  
 [Folk/blues music: New Boots Rag by Doctor Turtle ] 
Kamron:  I was looking for something that I thi nk is difficult to articulate, b ut, you know, I was 
looking for the kind of community that felt right and the kind of hospital and 
administrative staff that felt right. And when I came to McAlester, I met  David,  and 
other places where it  was sort of formal, you know, here , we had dinner at David's 
house and hung out, and I mean, it was just ' it had the kind of family vibe that I was 
looking for. I knew as early as my first time here in the community that this is  where I 
was coming.  
Cate:  He describes a place that's got a small town atmosphere but isn't uncomfortably 
isolated. And he was glad, he says, that the hospital needed him. He likes a fast -paced 
environment and the opportunity to make a difference.  
Kamron :  Professionally, I couldn't be happier here.  
Cate:  Kamron says the hospital administration has compassion and common sense, and they 
gave him autonomy to run his practice the way he sees fit. According to him, the care 
they provide is top tier.  
Kamron:   I mean, it's a really great hospital that ' I really believe in the care they provide. I 
delivered my daughter here, actually. And you know, it's been all around fantastic.  
 I love that it's a really welcoming community with nice people who are, you know , just 
really good, kind people who will do anything for you. It's like the polar opposite of New 
York City that I came from where someone will, like, step on your face for a dollar, you 
know? Here, it's different. People  will help each other. People are good t o each other. 
And that's great. That's how I want my children to grow up.  
Cate:  And the Physician Manpower Training Commission made a great partnership even 
better.  Kamron:  The PMTC was really like the icing on the cake. It was another element that really  sealed 
the deal on bringing me here. And I feel like it did exactly what it's supposed to, you 
know:  I came here from out of state. It got me to a rural town in McAlester, and I'm 
staying now. I mean, if that isn't success for the program , then I don't kno w what is , you 
know?  
Not that finances matter ultimately. You know, in life, I always try to do what feels right. 
As cheesy as it sounds, I've tried to always be on God's path, and I feel like if I'm doing 
that, then I'm always going to be happy and succe ss comes.  
Cate:  And so it has for Dr. Torbati, who received the Rural Health Physician of the Year Award 
for 2020.  
Kamron:  That was really insane. I wouldn't have even thought I'd be on anyone's radar for any 
kind of award. I'm just some guy out here McAl ester, you know, delivering babies. But it 
was a huge honor and I'm really appreciative to have gotten it, and I hope to continue to 
practice an excellent way that's deserving of that honor.  
 [Americana music: Back to the Woods by Jason Shaw ] 
Cate:  Fellow award recipient David Keith commends Kamron for not only providing  excellent 
care, but for exud ing a passion that inspires others.  
David:  Dr. Torbati's passion and commitment to rural health care has helped us recruit 
additional physicians. We have a gastroenterologist here now. We have a trauma 
surgeon here now. We have a cosmetic surgeon here. And basically, you can tie a lot of 
our recruitmen t efforts back to a passionate doctor, and Torbati is one if not the most 
passionate doctor about rural health care. And doctors like working with good doctors 
who are passionate about what they do.  
Cate:  McAlester Regional Health Center has been lucky not only to receive doctor Torbati and 
all the physicians who have followed his lead, but perhaps, according to Kamron, an 
even more impressive addition to the team:  Tiffany Torbati.  
Kamron:  My wife also ' she just graduated nursing school here in McAlester. We're basically high 
school sweetheart s. We've been with each other since I was 19 and she was 17. A nd 
she's been on this whole crazy journey of medicine and the Marine Corps ' she was 
there with me throug h all of it. She got her degree in political science, and she was ' 
she's brilliant. She's honestly smarter than me. She was a 4.0. grad. She was an intern 
for a senator for four years. Could have gone probably to like an Ivy League level law 
school, but p ut it on hold to sort of chase me and my dream of medicine.  
And we came here, and she wanted to do something else. She had sort of developed a 
love for medicine and women's health, and so she attended Eastern Oklahoma State 
University, and she's a nurse no w. She just graduated in May, and she's one of the labor 
and delivery nurses now, one of the n ew nurses they're training, so we get to work 
together . And it's going really well so far.   [Upbeat piano music: Wheels by Jason Shaw ] 
Cate:  While p racticing medicine in and of itself is a noble pursuit, Kamron believes in an even 
greater sense of purpose in providing care for those who need it most.  
Kamron:  And I think it's important. I think that when you're coming out of residency like I did, 
sometimes there's a fear or apprehension about coming to a rural place because, you 
know, you're putting yourself out there and you may not have the same level of support 
you would somewhere else. But I also think it's a responsibility for good, well -trained, 
elite doctors to come and serve rural communities. I really think that that's a part of my 
purpose, too, is to be taking care of people and providing good, elite care in a place t hat 
might not otherwise have it ' people who need more of an advocate than in other 
places, you know? So like I said, I always try to follow that path that I'm supposed to be 
on, and it led me to McAlester. And i t's important for me to do  my job well and take 
care of my patients here, you know, to the best of my abilities.  
Cate:  And while the Torbatis take care of McAlester, McAlester takes care of the Torbatis.  
 [Music fades out]  
 [25:35]  
James:  Man, that was pretty interesting. I enjoy ed hearing just things that he's been through in 
his life and just how he came about coming to McAlester. But of course, you're the one 
who actually sat down and talked with him. What did you like most or what did you 
glean from this conversation?  
Cate:  It's f unny 'cause, see, I was born here, you know, and anytime people move here from a 
cool place like California or New York or Grenada, like he said, you know, I'm always like, 
'Why? Why did you come here? And like, why did you ' why McAlester?' And so I'm 
asking him these questions, and he really kind of sold me as far as showing the contrast 
between what it's like in New York and, you know, the tertiary care facility. He said 
there's tons of elite, qualified doctors there who all kind of just circle around, you know, 
in the same communities. But coming to McAlester, he said  that that's a place where he 
wants to raise his family, and that's a place where he feels ' he sees a really tight -knit, 
appreciative community, and he gets to really feel those profound benefits of having an 
elite doctor on staff, and, you know, feeling like he not only changes lives, but he feels 
involved with the lives of his patients.  
James:  Yeah. You know, finding physicians like Dr. Torbati and bringing them to McAlester 
Regional Hea lth Center is what Michelle Mabr ay does for a living. B ringing doctor s and 
nurses to rural areas, though, can be a challenge, but McAlester seems to do pretty well 
for itself as she explains here in this conversation with us.  
 [27:13]  James:  Hello everyone.  We are here today with Michelle Mabr ay of McAlester Regional Medical 
Center. Welcome, Michelle.  
Michelle Mabray: Hi, James. Thanks so much for having me on. I appreciate it.  
James:  Absolutely. It's good to have you here.  
Michelle:  Yeah.  
James:  So your pos ition there ' you are a physician recruiter, which, of course, means you 
recruit physicians to work at your hospital. What does your job actually entail, you 
know? How do you successfully bring doctors to your hospital?  
Michelle:  Yeah, so , I am the physicia n recruiter, and with that, you know, my job is much broader 
than just recruiting. It's very important when we're sourcing candidates that we find 
individuals that have ties to the area and are interested in living in a rural area. You can 
have a really su ccessful recruitment program, but if you're not able to retain physicians 
and find quality candidates that will remain in your community, essentially, you know, 
your hospital will still really struggle with lack of access to health care.  
So, my job really  starts out with sourcing candidates, from finding individuals, again, 
with a strong in terest in serving in our area. B ut then also , recruiting ties so much more 
into other areas of lifestyle other than just professional interests. So finding areas ' 
finding ou t what's essential to that provider and his or her family unit is really part of my 
job as well. So I would say half of it is learning the needs of the organization and finding 
physician alignment within that physician engagement, retaining the physicians that we 
have, but then also sourcing candidates that will fill the gap within health care in our 
community, and then looking at their family unit to make sure that we're meeting their 
needs: with education; they're always interested in how the economy is d oing; what 
types of recreation opportunities are available; cost of living is a huge benefit to our 
area, and it's a way that we are able to attract people. If they're moving from the East or 
West Coast , typically housing is a third if not a fourth of the cost of housing in those 
areas.  
James:  Yeah.  
Michelle:  So that's a big draw t o the area. But my husband joked  last year that I had be come a real 
estate agent on the  side because finding housing that is good for families in this area 
can be really difficult. So just meeting all of the needs of the family for that transition is 
also part of my job as a recruiter.  
James:  You were able to hit on a lot of things that are involved with what you do to bring 
physicians to McAlester. Of all of those aspects, that alignment that you  talked about, 
are there any particular challenges to bring ing physicians to rural areas ' not only 
bringing them there , but also keeping them there?  Michelle:  Yeah. One difficulty in recruiting for a rural area is if you're recruiting a single specialist. 
For instanc e, we've been having difficulty recruiting psychiatry. Well, the first question a 
candidate asks me is, 'How many other psychiatrists do you have in your organization?' 
And unfortunately the answer to that is that we don't. And so, not having that physicia n 
to be able to have a second opinion, share call schedules, build a practice together ' it's 
very difficult to recruit that single provider into such a large role. It could seem that they 
would reach burnout fairly quickly.  
Another area is just recruitin g to rural areas in general. Only 1% of the population that 
graduates medical school has identified that they would like to w ork in a rural area, 
whereas 30 % of physi cians are actually needed in those  rural areas.  
James:  Yeah.  
Michelle:  So, you know, there's a major discrepancy there.  
The other thing  I would say is just, fina ncially, it's very expensive to recruit a physician. 
So, when we have physicians come on site, you know, the national average for that is 
20% will typically go into contract with you and successfully on board with you. And so, 
with that, you would think on e in every five physicians. But we really focus on building a 
relationship prior to the physician coming on site, making sure that we screen that 
candidate heavily, and making sure that our ideals already align before they come, so 
we have a 75 percentile success rate for signing those physicians, and that really cuts 
back on the cost of overall recruitment, which makes it easier for us. However, I know 
across rural America, it's extremely expensive to hire on a new physician, and it takes 
several years for  that physician to become established. So it's a very long term 
investment for recruiting.  
James: Wow. Yeah.  But, as you mentioned, that research and that advanced scouting and the 
alignment really helps your particular hospit al in really having that super high sign rate, 
which is great.  
Michelle:  Yes, yes.  
James:  So we just discussed challenges on bringing physicians to a rural hospital, but are there 
any maybe hidden advantages to coming to McAlester or a place like that?  
Michelle:  Absolutely. Well, outside of t he hospital, just the cost of living in rural Oklahoma is 
amazing. If you find a candidate and they're interested in owning land or, you know, 
they are comi ng fr om a higher cost of living ' that can be a major draw for families. We 
have really good education prog rams here and extracurricular activities for young 
children. You know, we do have a lot to offer here. Practicing in a rural area sometimes 
means that you have a much more diverse set of skills rather than specializing in any 
one area, which can really be a draw to providers because of the interest in medicine 
and serving and staying on with your population.  I would say the thing  that providers absolutely love the most is just a relationship with 
your patients. Typically, you do know your patients. You kno w the families of your 
patients, which is really wonderful in providing medicine. It's really gratifying to see 
them later down the road at the rotary club or Walmart or your children's events. You 
know, it's just much more of a community atmosphere than in the  metro area, which is 
really wonderful.  
James:  That's great. That is great.  
 My final question for you, Michelle, is this: of course, we've known each other for a 
while because in a former life you were  a TSET Healthy Living Program c oordinator ' 
Michelle:  Yes. 
James:  ' and a very good one , in Pittsburgh County. So I know that community health is a big 
deal t o you ' health and wellness. But what is it about this particular position at this 
medical center that really inspires you? What do you really love about what you're 
doing now?  
Michelle:  Well, when you think about the health of your community, access to health care is  
essential, and not just access to care, but access to quality health care is essential. And 
so working as a TSET Healthy Living coordinator, I absolutely loved that program. I was 
so integrated into the community, and we were able to really launch efforts to reduce 
tobacco use and reduce obesity in the area. But I felt that this was the next step in my 
career to really assist my community in an impactful way. I experienced it a lot in the 
community through family and friends, but I'll tell you a qu ick story if that's okay.  
Recently, we have launched a pulmonology search, and when we were discussing the 
need for pulmonology in our area, we had a former family medicine resident that now 
works as a hospitalist in our organization say that one of his p atients, to travel to a 
single pulmonology appointment two hours away, he had to load up six oxygen tanks ' 
James:  Wow.  
Michelle:  ' to make it back and forth to that one appointment. And, with chronic disease, you 
know ' unfortunately, our area of Oklahoma, we see a lot of COPD,  a lot of cancer, a lot 
of chronic disease in our area, and so not having that access can be detrimental to the 
lives of people in southeast Oklahoma. So, my big drive is to have quality health care in 
our area and to service those individuals. U nfortu nately, that gentleman was not able to 
keep up with his regular visits , and it greatly affected his health.  
Also, working in public health in the past, I have a huge drive for preventative health 
care, and not having access to ' or readily access to health care sometimes means that 
people go much later in their course of treatment, and if they had gone  earlier, they 
would have had much different outcome s. So I'm just very passionate about providing 
that health care accessibility to our community.  James:  Wow. Yeah,  I'm glad you are, and thanks for sharing that story. It really illustrates the 
need of ready medical access in rural areas, so thank you for that.  
Michelle:  Absolutely.  
James:  And tha nk you for your time, Michelle, and for your insights and your experiences.  We 
really appreciate it.  
Michelle:  Yes. I kno w that TSET is doing an amazing job of funding programs like PMTC and 
creating awareness and  emphasis on access to health care, so I 'm eternally grateful for 
your dedication to this  as well.  
James:  Oh, a bsolutely. Well, take care, and we 'll see you down the road, okay?  
Michelle:  Alright, thanks so much, James.  
 [38:03]  
James:  Well, that's a pretty involved process, Cate, but with a 19% national ph ysician signage 
rate at rural hospitals and clinics throughout the country, it's important for a medical 
facility to do whatever it can, and it sounds like McAlester Regional is doing it quite well.  
Cate:  Yeah, hearing it from her shows how critical of a positio n this really is. The tasks that are 
left to rural physician recruiters was really surprising as far as how intensive it is. Like, 
it's so much more than just hiring people and finances and salaries. It's about having 
your ear to the ground in the communit y so you can balance those needs and then also 
the needs of the physicians and their families. So you're, like, negotiating and 
coordinating between all these different moving parts, and I really admired her passion.  
 And next up is another passionate advoc ate, David Keith, who is the CEO of McAlester 
Regional Health Center. Let's hear what he has to say.  
 [39:08]  
James:  We're here today with David Keith. He is the CEO of McAlester Regional Health Center. 
Welcome and thank you for joining us.  
David:  Well, thank you. It's really go od to be here, and it's nice to have visitors.  
James:  Well, first question I wanted to ask is how extensive is the health center's geographical 
reach, and about how many patients do you see in an average year?  
David:  Well, McAlester Regional emphasizes the region. Over the decades, it's become very 
apparent that we've had to expand our footprint to support the hospital. So in today's 
environment, our primary service area is about nine counties. So we look at every 
coun ty that touches Pittsburgh County as our own. Now, with regard to the southeast 
Oklahoma region, we find ourselves taking care of patients from all 14 counties. So we are a true rural regional hub providing extensive care to 14 counties, about 250,000 
peop le ' 
James:  Wow.  
David:  ' and that includes cardiac care, oncology care, obstetrics, and we're a level three 
trauma hospital. So we are the predominant rural regional hub serving a wide vast of 
geographic area.  
James:  That's impressive. Very, very impressive. Now, I understand that y ou're also involved 
with hospitals and clinics throughout this region, and every hospital, of course, wants to 
provide the best medical services that they can for their communities, but in your 
experience, what makes delivery of medical services unique her e in southeastern 
Oklahoma?  
David:  Again, within an hour and a half drive, and I'm sure you made the drive ' 
James:  Yes. 
David:  ' you won't find another hospital that does the tertiary care services that we provide. 
Imagine yourself in an auto accident. We're level three trauma hospi tal. You're not 
going to want to drive, or you're not going to want to go in an ambulance drive for an 
hour and a half in order to get trauma care. We provide that. We do upwards to eight 
strokes a week. Can you imagine driving an hour and a half to two ho urs to find stroke 
care? Imagine delivering your baby and having to drive over an hour and a half to deliver 
your baby. And can you imagine if you had a heart attack? You come to this institution, 
our cath labs will take care of you. Other than that, you'v e got to drive to Oklahoma 
City, fly to Oklahoma City, or drive or fly to Tulsa. That's what makes us unique.  
The other unique part of us is, if you notice, southeastern Oklahoma is losing rural 
hospitals. The hospital in Eufala's closed. The hospital in W ilburton's closed. Stigler's 
almost closed. Atoka filed bankruptcy. Other hospitals have filed bankruptcy. We are 
sustained because of our reach and  our capabilities here. That makes us unique.  
James:  You mentioned the closings of hospitals, which is a problem wit h rural medicine, people 
needing to get access, especially during emergency situations like that. So I wanted to 
ask just what is the prognosis, I suppose, just from your experience, from what you see, 
in terms of the future health of these rural hospitals  so that people can get this access?  
David:  Well, when you talk to peers in this industry, and if you look at those who are following 
this industry and the impact on rural health care, there's about 300 rural hospitals in this 
nation that we expect to close withi n the next two to three years. Of that 300, there are 
18 hospitals that are on the edge of closure in Oklahoma. We see a very poor prognosis 
for rural hospitals. You will see small rural hospitals, critical access hospitals, forced to 
partner with other he alth care systems for sustainability, and we're starting to see that 
model play out. I think small hospitals are joining rural hubs, like Stillwater and Duncan 
and Altus and so forth. You're starting to see kind of a consolidation of health care services. I'll share we've helped support Atoka, we've helped support Idabel, and we are 
helping and supporting Poteau Eastern Oklahoma Medical Center. We feel like it's our 
duty in our accountability and responsibility to reach out and help sustain these small 
rura l hospitals for the betterment of patient care.  
James:  Right, right. I mean, these actions will help the hospitals, but of course it also helps the 
people that they serve, because otherwise there's nothing else out there for them.  
David:  Well, remember, rural hospitals are major economic drivers in a community. And I 
learned this back in the 80s when I first got into health care: show me a community that 
loses its hospital and I'll show you a dying community. And so what rural hospitals have 
to do is reinvent themselves.  You don't have to be a rural hospital  to be substantial in 
the future. You have to have good clinicians, good infrastructure and good technology. 
You don't need the cost of brick and mortar to provide those services in the future. And 
so there's a paradig m change that has to happen for these rural communities. Providing 
health care is very different tomorrow than it is today. Much like you recording this 
podcast on your cell phone, I can record my EKG on my cell phone. So things are 
changing right before u s. It's exciting times.  
James:  Very exciting times. It'll be interesting to see just how it keeps on going as these years 
go on.  
Let me close with this: what do you like most about your job here?  
David:  Well, what I like most about McAlester Regional Health Center is it's a very complex 
hospital. People don't realize how complex we are. We are independent. What I really 
like about this hospital more than anything else, because I come from very large tertiary 
care hospitals, is I actually know the doctors. I know my exe cutive team. I know the 
housekeeping employees. I know them. I work with them. I see them every day in this 
community. And I hear from this community the positive impact we're making. You 
don't necessarily get that in the large urban tertiary care centers.  It is very much family.  
James:  Well, thank you for your time. I appreciate it.  
David:  It's been a pleasure, and again, I thank you for visiting southeastern Oklahoma. I think 
you can see the challenges we have, but we have a team here that will rise to the 
occasion.  
James:  Very good. Thank you, Mr. Keith.  
David:  Good. Good to meet you. Thank you very much.  
 [46:38 ] 
James:  Well, those are some very interesting points that he brought out. You know, the 
dynamics of rural medicine, like so many other things , they are a -changing, and it is so 
important to adapt in order to survive and provide communities with the medical care that they need and deserve. It's a challenge, but one  that so many health care providers 
in underserved areas throughout the state are really passionate about meeting and 
delivering for their communities.  
Cate:  Yeah, i t was really rewarding to see all of the passion and knowledge and drive to meet 
this need, and  I was happy that we were able to zoom in particularly on McAlester 
Regional Health Center for this episode because it serves so many surrounding areas, 
covers the whole gamut of care, from pregnancy to wellness to cardiology to neurology 
to hospice ' ever ything. I mean, they are that whole hub of medical care for that entire 
region. So it was really eye -opening to see how vital this institution is for so many 
people and how the PMTC program adds a really critical incentive for bringing 
physicians to those areas.  
James:  Exactly. Exactly right. It was a privilege to go down and visit this particular medical 
center down in McAlester, but we know that there are dedicated physicians and clinics 
and administrators throughout the state who are doing whatever that they ca n in order 
to bring these services to their communities. You mentioned PMTC ' there are other 
associations, agencies who  are doing what they can, and I am so glad that TSET is 
involved and doing what it can, providing funding to bring much -needed physicia ns to 
places throughout the state. As Janie mentioned, you know, from Panhandle down to 
Little Dixie and everywhere else. And so I'm glad that TSET is very active and funds some 
very critical programs in this way.  
Cate:  Well, thank you listeners for joining us t oday. We hope you enjoyed this episode and we 
look forward to bringing you our next TSET Better Health Podcast. So until next time ' 
James:  This is James Tyree ' 
Cate:  ' and Cate Howell.  
James:  Wishing you peace ' 
Cate:  ' and Better Health.  
 [Theme music]  
 [49:07 ] 
 
 TSET Better Health Podcast Transcript  
Episode 6 : TSET Community Impact  
August 14 , 2020  
Summary: The TSET Healthy Living Program (HLP) and its coordinators have transformed 
communities across Oklahoma. Join James and Cate as they travel the state to share first -person 
perspectives of these grant -funded initiatives:  
Muskogee has used the TSET HLP to i mplement vast changes from complete streets, childhood 
nutrition, community gardens and wellness in the workplace. The coordinator in Newkirk helped city 
leaders and advocates secure a large grant to connect the community through safe sidewalks. Cleveland 
County has made immense progress in increasing nutritional food access in rural areas, which not only 
improves the health of residents but also supports local farmers. Prague Elementary School has 
reimagined what education can be with the help of TSET HLP coordinators by incorporating physical 
activity into the learning process.  
TSET HLP coordinators work with community leaders to implement strategic projects that create 
generational change. Tune in to learn more about TSET's impact on the lives of everyda y Oklahomans.  
 [Theme music]  
[0:15]  
James Tyree : Hello and welcome to the TSET Better Health Podcast. This is James Tyree, health 
communication consult at TSET.   
Cate Howell : And this is Cate Howell , health communication intern  at TSET . 
James : And today, w e are going t o discuss the community impact ' the impact that is felt 
statewide with TSET's community -based grants.  
As many of you know , TSET's mission is to lower the rates of cancer and cardiovascular 
disease throughout Oklahoma by decreasing rates of tobacco use and obesity. This is 
done primarily by givi ng grants in various capacities:  grants for cancer research, grants 
for statewide h ealth systems initiatives, but also community -based grant programs.  
Cate : One thing that I think is really unique to TSET and something that I don't think a lot of 
people know is that our reach stretches way far beyond just this Oklahoma City office 
becaus e of these grant programs. One example of this is the TSET Healthy Living 
Program, which has 35 grants throughout the state that help  transform wellness in their 
local communities.  
James :  That's true, that is so very true. You know, the coordinators who work within the TSET 
Healthy Living Program ' they do their work at the local level, right? And they do this by 
working with community partners who, together, work on policy, sustainable policy that increases ac cess to nutritional foods and physical activity and also prohibits tobacco use 
in public areas so people are a ble to breathe in cleaner air, and i t just really boosts the 
health of citizens all over the place.  
Cate:  See, and that's incredible. We have coor dinators who are working with community 
leaders all over the state just to improve the wellness of the entire state through these 
measures. And wellness is especially important right now beca use of this COVID -19 
pandemic. B ecause we've seen that tobacco us e increases the likelihood of severe 
outcomes of COVID -19. Obesity increases the likelihood of severe outcomes and COVID -
19. Lack of physical activity increases the likelihood of severe outcomes of COVID -19. 
And this is what TSET is all about, is trying to  make Oklahoman citizens healthier through 
acts of prevention like this.  
 So, today, we're going to hear from our fabulous HLP coordinators and some community 
partners in this episode, but fir st we're going to talk to TSET P rogram  Officer Jessica 
Davis, an d she i s going to give us an overview of this Healthy Living Program.  
James:  Sounds good. Let's listen now.  
 [3:09] 
James:  Hey Jessica, it is good to see you, and I'm glad that you're able to talk for a couple 
minutes about the new cycle of the TSET Heal thy Living Program. A lot of people in 
Oklahoma are kind of familiar with it because it had been around for five years, but can 
you tell us a little bit , generally speaking , what the TSET Healthy Living Program is, 
especially with this new five -year cycle coming up?  
Jessica Davis:  Thank you, James. TSET has funded community -based grants since 2004. Our new TSET 
Healthy Living Program builds upon the original Healthy Living Program initiative that 
was launched in 2015. This grant is focused on areas within a county where the poorest 
health outcomes exist. The health outcomes may be related to low life expectancy, it 
may be related to cancer , morbidity and mortality , and things like that. So really, this 
grant takes a look at the data that's attributed to tho se health outcomes and really just 
examines 'why do these poor health outcomes exist within a community?' A nd then 
once they kind of figure out the 'why ' behind the story, they're able to select strategies 
related to tobacco use and obesity that would be a  really good fit to overcome the 
identified obstacles and barriers related to poor health within the county.  
James:  So there are like 35 of these grants this time around, so it sounds like , with what you just 
said, it  won't be a cookie -cutter approach. Eac h grant will do what they need to based 
on what they find out locally?  
Jessica:  That's correct. We realized that every county is unique and we really want them to 
identify what the problems are within those counties. They're going to be working in 
what we  call hot spots. So those are those identified areas where there may be lower 
life expectancy, as I previously said, and they're going to really select, you know, 
strategies that align with why are people having problems accessing healthy food, or why do p eople not go outside and use the trails or walk within their community. There 
may be some barriers that are preventing them from doing so. So we're really looking at 
that, and grantees, along with collaborative group members and partners, are going to 
see what strategies would best help communities overcome those identified barriers.  
James:  You know, as you are very well aware, TSET ' we have grant programs for research , 
cancer research, there are s tatewide grants ' why is it important for us to also have 
community -based grants?  
Jessica:  Well, c ommunity -based grants are important because they really take a look at the 
population as a whole within a community. We're not focused on working one by one 
with individuals to help assist with poor health outcomes. We're  really looking at groups 
of people in order to solve the problems, and we know that funding community grants is 
important because we know that local people help solve local problems. You can't 
necessarily have somebody from the state tell people what the  problems are within 
their communities. The community knows their problems the best and the best 
solutions to solve those problems that they find.  
James:  All right. Thank you very much. We ll, take care,  Jess.  
Jessica:  Thank you so much for having me today.  
 [6:29 ] 
James:  You know, we traveled across Oklahoma to get perspectives from our community 
members. We had a lot of fun doing that over the past few days, didn't we?  
Cate:  Yes, we did.  
James:  And you'll get to hear some of our experiences and the people that we talked to 
throughout this podcast. Let's go first to Muskogee where I met up wi th TSET Healthy 
Living Program C oordinators Doug Walton and Angel Tillman, and also with Craig 
McNeill with DalTile, a plant there in Muskogee, who were all eager to tel l us about the 
exciting changes happening there to improve the wellness of the people and employees 
in that area.  
 [7:09]  
James:  Alright, w e are in Muskogee here, and we are here with Doug Walton and Angel Tillman 
with the TSET Healthy Living Program in Mu skogee County, and they're also with the 
Muskogee County Health Department, which is the lead agency for the Healthy Living 
Program in this county. Now, until COVID arrived, which of course changes everything, 
how would you describe the state of wellness i n the Muskogee area? What are the 
strengths , and what were some areas that need improvement , just generally speaking?  
Doug Walton:  James, thank s for coming to  Muskogee, by the way. It's good to have you here.  Probably our greatest strengths right now  are physical activity levels in the county. A s far 
as the data both for leisure time  physical activity and aerobic physical activity, better 
than the state average. S till room for improvement, but those are probably the  ' sort of 
the best  indicators that we'v e got. We'r e still ' we've got a long way to go on obesity 
rates, smoking prevalence and , really, diet -related  chronic conditions . 
Angel Tillman:  I have some childcares that are still working on their gardens throughout the pandemic. 
They are still working  with their gardens and eating healthy , and they're still feeding the 
children that they're serving healthier meal s from the foods from the gardens. A nd that 
was a plus. I was excited to get those pictures and find out that they're still working with 
their  gardens. So, the healthy eating is still taking place, physical activity is still taking 
place, and also the tobacco -free environments. Gospel Rescue Mission has gone 
completely 100% tobacco -free. They're a tobac co-free campus as of January 1 , 2020. So, 
organizations in Muskogee, I think they're doing great.   
Doug:  James, I'd say one of the policies I'm most proud of is the City of Muskogee's Complete 
Streets policy passed in 2016. After several years working with the city and our AIM 
infrast ructure committee, Action in Muskogee committee, to really look at some of the 
kind of best policies around the nation and draw from those, and then, in fact, in 2017, 
the City of Muskogee's policy was named within the top 10 Complete Streets policies in 
the nation by t he Complete Streets Coalition. I t actually tied for number four. So we 
were really, really happy about that, and the city has embraced it. You know, we've 
helped develop some  implementation checklists;  we've added a lot of on -street bike 
ways  and new trail projects that have been funded and are under construction right 
now, sidewalks. So , we think the work getting it in place has paid off, and we're really 
proud of that one.  
James:  That's tremendous. I mean, that's a really big deal, and, as y ou mentioned, sometimes it 
can take a while before things happen.  
Angel:  I am really excited about the resolution that the Healthy Food Retail Task Force has 
passed, and we had it approved through the City of Muskogee, and that's one of the 
things we have accomplished as well.  
James:  So what does that entail?  
Doug:  Basically, the resolution was the city dating the importance of access to healthy foods 
and formed a task force that came together, multi -agencies from throughout the city 
and the county, really to look at the barriers to healthy food access, to increase 
awareness about programs such as SNAP (Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program) 
acceptance at the farmers market, increasing the availability of fresh produce through 
community pantries and meal  programs, putting together a resource guide that lists all 
of those, and actually helping the city to apply for grant funding to build a new sidewalk 
between a public housing project and nearby convenience store, and so it's really been 
another example of  something we're quite proud of.  James:  Very good. Now, as of July 1  of this year , at the start of this new fiscal year, Muskogee 
and other grantees throughout the state have started a new five -year cycle of the TSET 
Healthy Living Program. So , going forwa rd, what are you looking forward to in terms of 
maybe areas of emphasis for reducing obesity rates, tobacco use and such?  
Doug:  Sure, yeah. Well, we're really excited about the new assessment tools that TSET has 
developed and the data that they've gathered  at the county level, and actually, at the 
census tract level and even within census tracts within census blocks. We're able to now 
see several different sort of indexes. There's an area of deprivation index that sort of 
puts together a lot of things, pove rty and education, and access to healthy foods, and all 
of those into an index that we can use at those geographies.  
So we've identified, initially, several census tracts within the City of Muskogee that have 
lower -than -average life expectancy, and the Ch ild Opportunity Index ' I've never heard 
of it before ' and it pulls together a number of different variables that looks at 
children's health and basically welfare within a region, and so we have several in 
Muskogee that have very low Child Opportunity I ndexes. We have a collaborative group 
that we've assembled and are still adding to that's going to help us really kind of hone in 
and identify which of those are sort of the greatest priority. We have a lot of areas in 
need, and we know we probably can't wor k with all of them initially, and so we're going 
to be looking forward to getting the input from our other partners on that.  
James:  You're doing  a lot of good work with kids and schools and with communities ' you 
mentioned Complete Streets ' and also busin esses, of course: we've got Craig here from 
DalTile. How important or why is it important to also work with the business sector in 
your work?  
Doug:  Well, several reasons , really . I mean, these are the places where the people who live in 
Muskogee ' you know , employers are where they spend most of their waking hours, 
and so having employers who understand the importance of providing an environment 
that supports healthy options and allows their employees to have choices is really 
critical and crosses the entir e community.  
James:  Craig McNeill here from DalTile: I've heard you speak before and present before, make it 
your business in Tulsa and I think another place as well, with the work that you've done 
in terms of improving wellness for employees there. Is the re a particular experience or a 
story of someone who's really benefited greatly from the wellness policies that you've 
had in correlation with the Healthy Living Program?  
Craig McNeill:  Sure. Absolutely. Some of those were really at the beginning when we i mplemented 
tobacco -free policy, which is one of our strengths. We know from sort of collecting 
stories that we've had team members make the struggle to quit using tobacco. 
Sometimes they relapse, sometimes they struggle again, but it's ' specifically, we'v e had 
employees that doubted that tobacco -free policy was for the benefit of them, that it was 
' they really believe that was only for the benefit of the company and there was nothing 
in it for them, and when they finally made the deci sion that it really w as that we we re 
caring about them as employees and they made the decision to engage in quitting using 
tobacco, they then also got family members to quit using tobacco, perhaps in that household or children in that household or adult children that might be using tobacco 
also to quit using tobacco in their families. And so that has multiplied the effect that we 
have with those people who have become serious about quitting use. Other times, 
we've had employees th at have quit but their spouse doe sn't quit, and then their spouse 
quits but they don't quit, and so they're having that struggle in their families and we're 
able to offer support for them. Even though we're not successful, they may just be 
quitting at work. So for the 12 hours that they're there working  their shift three and a 
half days a week, they're not using tobacco because that's ' for themselves, and it's 
reduced what they're doing versus what they would have otherwise. We know that 
that's happened, too.  
James:  Very good. Thank you very much. We a ppreciate your time here in lovely Muskogee, 
USA.  
 [15:12]  
Cate:  Wow, that is so much that's happening in just one county. I mean, you talked about 
Complete Streets, talked about childhood nutrition, community gardens , and wellness in 
the workplace, collaborating with business leaders. That's incredible.  
James:  You know, Muskogee has made great strides in all of these areas, and it shows how 
much a community can transform into becoming a healthier place.  
Now, I know that you traveled to the very northern end of Oklahoma to the town of 
Newkirk.  
Cate:  I certainly did. Tha t was a great trip, great experience. I spoke with City Manager Jane 
Thomas and TSET HLP Coordinator Jenny Creech about how they worked together with 
other community advocates to secure a (T -A-P) TAP grant to connect the city through 
walking paths. So they're going to explain a little bit about what that means and how 
that's going to really help out the ir community.  
 [16:12]  
Cate:  Hello, listeners. We ar e here today with Jane Thomas, the city manager of Newkirk, 
Oklahoma, and Jenny Creech, the TSET Healthy Living Program coordinator for Kay 
County. So , ladies, thank you so much for joining me today. Would you mind first just 
telling me a little bit about yourselves and how you got involved with TSET, Jenny, and 
then how you got involved with the city?  
Jane Thomas:  Jenny first or Jane first?  
Cate:  Either one.  
Jenny Creech:  [laughs] I'll go first.   So, I have been the TSET Healthy Living Program coordinator  for Kay County for five 
years. S o, from the beginning of the very first Healthy Living Program grant, I've been 
there. And I live in Ponca City, I'm a Kay County resident, and I have two little boys.  
Jane:  And I'm Jane Thomas. I've been the city manager f or four years for the City of Newkirk, 
and I was always looking for health and fitness for the c ity of Newkirk, and something ' 
it started out that it was just for the kids, but it's involved from 8 to 80 now, so me and 
Jenny got connected and put our head s together.  
Jenny:  We actually started talking about different things, and with her approach on health and 
wellness for the community, one of the things that got up was the TSET Healthy 
Communities Incentive Grant. And so that's actually how I kind of got in the door with 
her, and then I was able to explain our program, what we do , and then what the 
incentive grant does, and Jane pulled out this picture of a walking path and she goes, 
'Would this ' would that grant help with this?' And I was like, 'Heck yea h, it would! 
Where'd you get this? Where did this come from?' That started everything, and Jane 
and I have developed a wonderful relationship over the last four years.  
Jane:  Yeah.  
Cate:  Can you, one of you or both of you , tell me a little bit about what a TAP grant is exactly, 
like what is that acronym?  
Jane:  Transportation Alternative Program. So, it's transportation without vehicles , normal cars 
' 
Jenny:  Non -motorized transportation.  
Jane:  Non -motorized. You can walk. You can bike, roller skate, skateboa rd, anything, but not ' 
non-motorized vehicles.  
Cate:  Well, let's talk about this walking path. How did that happen?  
Jane:  Actually, a young lady by the name of Hannah Cross came to interview me for  ' I believe 
it was a Girl Scout project to start with. Sh e was 10 when this started. She's 13 now. We 
hit it off just like me and Jenny did, and she was wanting to know my ideas and what we 
need to do in the city, and I said, 'Well, I'd really love to fix up Lions Park and make it a 
walking path and have it wher e all the kids could enjoy it, and the adults, and things like 
that.' And the youth program was already working on the baseball field. So, next thing 
when I met with Hannah, she brought me this map here. So , this is how we starte d. It 
was like 1.7 miles. A nd she even put , like, in green the good sidewalk  and in red the bad 
sidewalk . 
Jenny:  She had done a walkability audit before she even knew what a walkability audit was.  Jane:  Yes. So then, me and Jenny got together, and Hannah and Hannah's mother, and we 
started thinking about how we could do this project. And we knew about the TAP grant, 
and we knew about TSET. So, we were waiting for the TAP to open again.  
Jenny:  We waited for a year. So, we had started things in the fall of 2017. It doesn't seem like 
that long ago.  [laughs]  
Jane:  I know.  
Jenny:  Hannah and her mom helped us with gathering community members for a community 
walkability and bikeability audit , and we had ' between community members and the 
school, we had over 300 walkability and bikeability  audits completed.  
 We did different things while we were waiting for it to open, and a few years ' I guess it 
was probably about a year before that, I had already worked with the school to try to 
come up with a Safe Route to School route. So, we worked to  create that path, and in 
one of our meetings pretty early on, we had talked about incorporating the Safe Routes 
to School into the walking path piece of it because it connected at a single point by the 
gym.  
Jane:  In the beginning, you know, like I said, y ou know, I was concentrating on Lions Park for 
the youth, but when we got to doing all this, there is no age limit. We're calling it, like, 8 
to 80, because you can walk it, you can run it, you can jog it, you can bike it ' all these 
things.  
Jenny:  Part of  this path comes around the senior housing.  
Jane:  It also goes by our library. I mean, it incorporates quite a bit here in just a small area of 
Newkirk.  
Cate:  So how much was the TAP grant for?  
Jane:  It was $720,000, and the city's share of that is $147,00 0. 
Jenny:  One of the, and correct me if I'm wrong, but it's one of the largest grants that Newkirk 
has received that's going towards the infrastructure specifically for pedestrian and 
bicycle safety.  
Jane:  It is the biggest.  
Jenny:  So it's going to be some thing that's really huge that is ' it's connecting the community, 
it's going to allow for more people to get out to walk, and overall, it's going to improve 
quality of life.  
Cate:  To what extent was TSET involved in this and what other benefits has TSET h ad on the 
community?  Jenny:  The Healthy Living Program, we 've ' and I say we ' it's been from the beginning and the 
get-go. 
Jane:  Mm-hmm. Both of us. A nd some of the things ' you know,  we had become smoke -free, 
vapor free in our parks, all of our city prop erties. And then we had to have a wellness 
committee ' 
Jenny:  Mm-hmm.  
Jane:  ' and they meet quarterly to ' what we can do to be healthier for ourselves and 
employees. It seemed like a whole lot, but ' in the beginning, you know?  
Jenny:  [laughs]  
Jane:  But once we got going, it wasn't that hard , really , for us. And  we encourage community 
gardens ' the city'll support that. Just different things like that that I think makes us 
more aware of what we need to do to stay healthy.  
Cate:  Ladies, thank you so much f or your time today. It's been really great to get to know you , 
and I'm really excited to follow up on all the changes that you're implementing here. So, 
thank you very much.  
Jenny and Jane:  Thank you.  
 [22:42]  
Cate:  So one thing that they were really proud of with getting this TAP grant was the ability to 
connect the entire city in a really safe and physically active way through these walking 
paths. S o it's still in development;  they haven't put it all into place yet, but they've 
already seen some amou nt of community excitement about it, seeing people walking 
around the city plaza. People are really going to start seeing the benefits of this for 
generations to come beca use it's going to create a town ' a city of healthier and more 
active people.  
James:  Well, it's really nice to see and hear how the TSET HLP helped a small community get 
such a large Department of Transportation grant that will make such a long lasting 
impact, so thanks for bringing that to us.  
Cate:  And back in Norman in Cleveland County,  James, you spoke with the Healthy Living 
Program coordinator Aley Cristelli about how sup port and guidance from the TSET -
funded program helped to increase healthy food access in not just Norman, but also in 
smaller surrounding towns, right?  
James:  That's true.  
Cate:  That's great. Let's hear what she has to say.   [23:52]  
James:  Hello, Aley. It is so good to see you, and thank you for taking the time to spend a few 
minutes with us on the podcast.  
Aley Cristelli:  Yeah, thanks for having me.  
James:  Absolutely. Well, first thing I want ed to say and ask is Cleveland is one of the healthiest 
counties in the state, so, you know, why is it important for the TSET Healthy Living 
Program to be in the Moore and Norman area?  
Aley:  Yeah. You know, we're actually r eally proud of how healthy Cleveland County ranks in 
the state, and I think that we can take some of that credit. We've been here in Cleveland 
County with Norman Regional ' we've had a grant for a really long time. So we had the 
opportunity to improve heal th here for many years. That partnership between Norman 
Regional and the TSET Healthy Living Program has the ability to have a really big impact 
because we can focus on the hospital taking care of clinical health care while we can 
focus on the community he alth, and it makes it easy to really maintain that health in the 
long run. And we have really great partners here, so we've been able to do a lot of really 
great things because we have the best partners on our side.  
And we're still here because we're emba rking on this new five -year grant because our 
work isn't done. We do rank highly in health outcomes, but we really have a large 
population here, so any work that we can do to improve health outcomes affects a lot of 
people. And while a lot of our work does  happen in Moore and Norman, we do work in 
smaller communities, too, like Lexington and Noble where we've had a lot of success, 
and these communities do have poor er health outcomes and can benefit from that work 
just as much as the bigger communities like Norman and Moore.  
James:  Alright. That's great to hear. Well, the TSET Healthy Living Program in this county has 
done a lot to increase sustainable wellness, as you alluded to earlier, in businesses and 
schools, cities and towns, but one particular area of success, at least that I know about, 
has been in increasing access to healthy foods. Can you talk a little more about what's 
been happening in Norman and also in smaller towns that make it easier for people to 
get healthy foods?  
Aley:  Yeah. So, I talk a l ot about access to healthy foods. It's definitely one of my favorite 
topics and passions. But over the previous Healthy Living grant, we were able to pass a 
healthy retail resolution in Norman, Noble and Lexington. All of those resolutions really 
set up a task force to address food access in each community, but the work really looks 
different in each area because we have different concerns and different community 
members at the table. So, in Norman, we had a lot of great discussion, and we ended up 
creating  a food access map. We actually went out to all of the retailers that had food 
permits and we looked at what they were selling, how walkable they were, and we 
created a map that showed how easy it was to get to these areas, and then if they had 
healthy opt ions at those stores. And that was housed on the city's web page so people 
could find it easily.  In Lexington ' that's kind of a fun story ' we started with a demonstration instead of 
just, you know, policy, and we did that because there wasn't a lot of d iscussion yet on 
food access. So, we started with pop -up farmers market and a play street. So basically, 
we closed the street and brought in vendors that would sell produce; we p ut toys out 
and chalk and paint  for the kids to play with; we had music. It re ally just got people 
excited about having something in Lexington and what could happen. So that 
demonstration actually brought out and showed the need for a farmers market in 
Lexington and showed that it could work, and so we partnered with the health 
depa rtment, and during that day, we had people coming up constantly going, 'Hey, how 
do we do this again next month?' So by the end of the day, we had two people who live 
in Lexington who were willing to keep the market going. They're actually in their second 
farmers market season this year. And we have helped them a little bit along the way 
with marketing and ideas, but really, it's community -led, and they're doing what works 
for their community. They're working to ac cept SNAP and senior benefits. A nd it's rea lly 
cool to think back: we started that demonstration with five ve ndors and, you know, 
some chalk ' 
James:  Yeah.  
Aley:  ' and now  they have 20 vendors, and it's happening every month , and it's completely 
community -led. So, that's a really exciting, fun thin g that, you know ' it just started with 
an idea and basically getting the city on board.  
 So, we did that in Lexington, and in Moore, we were able to help them get senior 
farmers market benefits and SNAP benefits at their farmers market. And, you know, it 
really helps the farmers, too. So, in Moore, now that money is going ' instead of going 
to big box stores, it's actually going into farmers' pockets. So it really impacts the entire 
food system.  
 But moving forward, I'm really excited to, you know, continu e the momentum of this 
food access discussion and really helping in Norman. We can put together a food policy 
council, so we can keep that going. But also, you know, as the world's shifted , and we 
are going to adopt a new normal, I'm hoping that we kind of  use this lens that the 
pandemic has created and really highlighted some issues, and food access is one of 
those, and I'm really hoping that we can bring the good and address some of the things 
like food insecurity and food access that's really impacting p eople, and especially in 
these communities. So, hopefully there is some good that comes from this.  
James:  That's fantastic. A lot of things happening throughout the county, and not just Norman. 
And what I really enjoyed about what you said about Lexington,  which is true with so 
many other projects and outcomes, is that you kind of were there to help get things 
started, but then the community took over, which is really a lot what the HLP does. It's 
about kind of really kick -starting the community for sustain able health. So,  that's  
fantastic.  
Aley:  Yeah, I think you're so right. We can go in and tell people what to do, but nobody wants 
to be told what to do, and I think it works so much better when we go in and we show a community what could be , and then they grab a  hold of it and make it th eir own and 
make it sustainable  like you said.  
James:  How long have you been with the HLP?  
Aley:  It's been a little while. So, December will be five years.  
James:  Wow. That's a very good run. You know, in tho se years of collaborating with community 
partners on a variety of projects and policies, what is it that motivates you to do this 
work?  
Aley:  Yeah. So, you know, I mentioned food access is something that is just really important to 
me and it always has bee n, but I've really been able to grow in that work and work on , 
not only food access , but a lot of health issues within the HLP program. But I'm really 
motivated in this work because you get to see the big picture. I worked in clinical 
nutrition prior to th is and, you know, you get to see patients for a couple days, and you 
don't really know if , when they go home , you're making much of an impact. This work is 
slower, but it does have a larger impact.  So that farmers market that we talked about ' I 
had that i dea for a long time and it took several years to get somebody to say yes, but 
now that market is going to impact the community , and it's impacting generations of 
people who are eating that healthy food every day, and there could be a child who never 
had fr esh strawberries or never got to pick those or something, and they get to do that. 
And so the work is slow, but it really has a huge impact and a long -lasting impact on 
people's lives, and that's important to me.  
James:  Well, thank you for your time. I rea lly appreciate it, and continued success to you and 
the others in your office and to your community partners. Thank you very much.  
Aley:  Yeah, thanks for having us. 
  [31:01]  
Cate:  You know, nutrition is so important for our well -being, and ' we're seeing that especially 
right now ' and those are some really awesome developments in Cleveland County, and 
it's yet another representative of the good work that the TSET Healthy Living Program 
does throughout Oklahoma.  
James:  That is so true. But you know, there is another TSET community -based grant program 
that really helps people of all ages throughout our state besides the Healthy Living 
Program, and that is the TSET Incentive Grants program for schools and communities. 
Now, I got to visit Prague Elementary Sch ool in Lincoln County to learn about the 
creative ways that they are helping kids and students with their health. That's just one 
example. But before we do, let's learn more about this program in general from Connie 
Befort and Sharon Howard. They are the p rogram managers for the Healthy Incentive 
Grant programs, so let's listen in.  
 [32:01]  James:  We are here at TSET with Connie Befort and Sharon Howard. They are program 
managers of the Healthy Incentive Grant program, and they will shine a little light in 
terms of what the program is all about. So , thank you for being here.  
I'll ask this of you, Sharon: what exactly is the Hea lthy Incentive Grants program, and 
how does it work?  
Sharon Howard: Basically our incentive grant programs are kind of an offshoot o f TSET. We're out there 
working with community organizations as far as, like, with the cities, and I work with 
schools and school districts, and our program is really designed to help those cities and 
schools adopt and implement the best and promising prac tices, especially in the areas of 
tobacco -free environments, access to healthy and nutritious foods, access to additional 
physical activities, for playgrounds or for walking tracks, those kind of things, in an effort 
to improve health and  reduce  those risk  factors that we know are preventable, so things 
like heart disease, stroke, cancer. And , along with TSET's mission, our goal is to improve 
the quality of life for all of our Oklahomans, and we do that by working in those 
community sectors.  
James:  This is some very important work here, in terms of lowering risk for very serious 
illnesses, but it sounds like the grants can be pretty fun, too, in terms of the outcome.  
Sharon:  Oh, absolutely. We do allow the communities and schools to be able to choose what 
their project is that they're going to work on or how they spend the incentive grant 
funds, and, overwhelmingly, the schools tend to spend their funds on either PE 
equipment or playground equipment. But they also do things like walking tracks or 
walking tr ails, action -based learning equipment ' so that's equipment that allows the 
kids to be active and move while they're sitting in the class learning. So it makes learning 
fun; it helps those kids who have the wiggles be able to sit and actually learn much 
better.   
James:  All right. Connie, you manage the program that deals with healthy communities, but let 
me just ask you just a general question: how and when do schools and cities apply for 
healthy incentive grants?  
Connie Befort:  Our grant year coincides with the fiscal year, so we are into our FY 21 program. We will 
be announcing the criteria and the guidelines in September. Our application periods for 
FY 21 will be September 15 through October 15, and then again , January 4 through 
February 5.  
James:  Okay . And where do they find this information, for those who want to apply?  
Connie:  All of that information will be on our TSET website under funding opportunities.  
James:  Now, both of you have traveled quite a bit throughout the state to meet with people to 
tell them about the programs, and you met a lot of people along the way. Now, what 
sort of things do you see or hear or experience when you meet the people from these 
communities and schools that you come in contact with?  Sharon:  For the schools, it's reall y exciting. They're usually always very happy to show off their 
project, and one of the things that I'm always really pleased to see is not only did they 
improve in the one area that their project was, but it makes a big difference for the 
culture of the s chool. Because of all the policies that they have to pass, it really changes 
their view of what health in schools really means. Some of our policy elements have to 
do with kids having more access to water during the school day; many of the schools use 
the funds to purchase what we call hydration stations ' those are the water bottle filling 
stations that are very popular ' and I get reports all the time of how much more water 
the kids are drinking, and not only the kids, but the faculty and staff also. In o ur rural 
schools especially, the school is the hub of the community, and it helps bring all of those 
factors together to help make a better , safer place for our kids to learn, and we know 
that healthy kids learn better.  
James:  So true, so true. And speakin g of communities, when you go out to communities, what 
do you see and experience, Connie?  
Connie:  Well, it's been very interesting to see how these very small rural communities are 
getting together with partners ' with their hospital, with their county hea lth 
department, with their banks, with their chamber of commerce ' and they do these 
actions and put together these policies to make their community better, and they work 
as a group. It's very interesting to see. We've had an instance where both the school  and 
the community in south Oklahoma combined their money and built a toddler enclosed 
playground, not only for the school, but for the entire community.  
James:  Thank you for shedding some light on that. We appreciate it.  
 [37:19]  
Cate:  We're excited now t o listen more about what's been going on at Prague schools, 
because the administrators there with, obviously, the help from the TSET HLP applied for 
and received one of these Healthy Schools Incentive grants that played a huge part in 
transforming the camp us by adding playground equipment and opportunities for more 
nutritional snacks.  
James:  That is correct. So I paid this visit to Prague Elementary School where Principal Chad 
Smith and TSET  Healthy Living Program Coordinator David Smith discuss the impact that 
the incentive grant has had on the kids and on the community.  
 [37:59]  
James:  Alright, we are here at Prague Elementary School, and we're talking with Principal Chad 
Smith ' hello ' and we're also here with David Smith, who is with the TSET Healthy 
Living Program. But first things first, Chad, wanted to talk with you about the Healthy 
Schools Incentive Program. You guys were able to earn grants with it, and wanted to 
know what the funds helped to pay for here.  Chad Smith:  Well, first, thank you for com ing today. We enjoy talking about our programs and things 
that we're able to do here at Prague Elementary. We did receive two grants separately 
and we were able to do a lot of different things with them in each building. One of the 
major things we've done that helps our kids is we were able to add water bottle filling 
stations all throughout our campuses. I see kids are actually drinking water instead of 
drinking pop and drinking Kool -Aid and all those kind of things. The kids drink water with 
a water bottl e every day. We've had to change the filters I don't know how many times 
already because they're using it so much.  
Over at the middle school, I know they bought basketballs, and they bought tether ball 
equipment. They bought volleyballs over there to get the kids playing at recess and keep 
them from just sitting down there and talking on their phones, and so they've got them 
up moving around.  
The fridge ' they bought a fridge at the high school. The healthy snack options in the 
vending machines aren't wel l received by students: whole wheat Pop -Tarts and low -fat 
Doritos ' you know, those aren't the good things to eat. So they started doing parfaits 
and yogurt and granola and fresh fruit and grapes and stuff like that and store it the 
refrigerator, and our s ecretary of the high school was selling those on our nutrition 
break time in between second and third hour. They sold out just about every day. So 
they were able to get kids actually buying and eating fruit as opposed to a prepackaged 
thing out of the vend ing machines there.  
 We've done some stuff for our playground. We bought paint for our playground, which 
kind of seems like an odd buy, but out in the playground, our art club volunteered to 
come over through the high school and draw different games on the  playground with 
them. There are little dinosaurs; they've got little games the kids can play; there's a race 
that they have to do a hop, a skip a turn, a run; walk the balance beam, those things 
outside, and they use it every single day. It's peeling up p aint now because we're going 
to have to repaint them.  
 And then, we bought some equipment at the elementary, at the Early Childhood Center, 
for our ABC classroom, which is called our action -based classroom. We bought a rowing 
machine to add to our action -based classroom. And so, the action -based classroom is 
reall y important to those young kids, or those young teachers for sure , that use it all the 
time. If you want a chance to see an ABC classroom, we'd love to have you.  
James:  Can you tell us real quickly  what an ABC classroom is? Action -based ' what's that all 
about?  
Chad:  So our action -based classroom ' there is a series of centers, basically, that have 
different actions associated with them. So what they're trying to do is they're trying to 
pair a physical activity with a mental activity. So, we have the QWERTY keyboard on the 
wall, and the kids will spe ll their spelling words throwing the ball against the wall and 
catching it off the board, so they're having to think about different obstacles other than 
just their reading. They have a treadmill over there that the kids run on and read off of. 
They have a  high -knees jogger machine over there that the kids will say their vocabulary 
words, or what they've really used in the se little grades is for sight words. And then they have a figure 8 where they'll walk the figure 8 and the teacher will read to them, and  it's 
amazing with retention what those kids learn, just something about that figure 8 and 
walking around. They have a balance beam section. There's about eight or ten different 
devices over there, or sections over there, where they're doing a mental exerc ise and an 
educational exercise at the same time to kind of cross those brain waves over. So, our 
ECC teachers, especially our kindergarten and first grade and Pre -K teachers really like it.  
James:  Very nice. So, it's a way of helping them learn more by us ing physical activity, so that's 
pretty cool.  
Are there any other ways that perhaps the Healthy Living Program here has helped you 
and the school in addition to helping with the Healthy Incentive grants?  
Chad:  Yeah, they've really just got us thinking outside the box ' Sheri  and David have been 
instrumental in helping us with that ' just trying to think of different ways to achieve 
objectives that work for our district, and every district 's going to be a little different. We 
were trying to find a way t o get kids on the playground more and to have kids still do 
their homework, and so we were able to add extra recess in the morning. So, from 7:45 
in the morning to 8:15 in the morning, our kids now go to the playground and play, 
whether it be an organized game set up by the people on duty or just free play some 
days. Those kids come into the classroom, they got the wiggles out, they've got the 
shakes out, they're a little tired, and they come in and they sit down and they get right 
back to work, and our tea chers have really enjoyed the fact that those kids are ready to 
learn. Our discipline in the mornings has gone down. And so now, they have a morning 
recess, the n they have PE in the morning, and they have lunch recess. We've really 
added ton of physical ac tivity to our day, and it's made a difference for the kids.  
 They've also really helped us just be able to apply for grants other than the ones that are 
offered through TSET on top of these, but they've helped us with outside grants, being 
able to find way s to adjust things to help our school. We have a school health team now 
that they were helping us and have helped us establish that they're part of. On that 
health team, we have a nurse. That nurse has been amazing for a small district. I mean, I 
look back  now, I'm like, 'How did we get by without a nurse?'  
 Our summer reading fitness program is something that we take a lot of pride in. It's a 
program that we've started several years ago. We started out with 30 -something kids 
and it bloom s now to over a hun dred kids. A nd so, adding fitness and health with our 
reading program for 8 days in the summer. Our kids have access to a nutritionist, they 
have access to a health trainer, and they're also getting reading education over the 
summer as well.  
 And those thi ngs have been amazing for our district , and they help us every day.  
James:  Wow, that is fantastic.  I want to ask you, David: there are a number of communities, a number of school s here 
in Lincoln County, community gov ernments and things like that ' how is  that you form 
partnerships with folks like Chad and others?  
David Smith:  Well, we're real fortunate. Both Sheri  and I were in education for over 35 years, so 
we've got contacts that we've made thro ughout that time. I've taught ' all my 35 years 
have bee n in Lincoln County except for three where I started out at Luther, so we had 
those contacts.  
We've got nine school districts in Lincoln County, and one of those school districts is 
really well off so they don't need a lot of the incentive money and stuff  like that, but 
they've worked with us helping us to rewrite their tobacco policies and health and 
nutrition. But every other school in Lincoln County has received an incentive grant 
through the Healthy Living Program that we've been working with. They've been really, 
really good to work with us. They've had questions. We'd rewrite their policies and help 
them get that done, and they'd call up with suggestions, 'Can we do this? Can we do 
that?' Lincoln County has really accepted it, and it's really been a b ig benefit to Lincoln 
County. It's really helped all of those eight, all ' really, all nine schools in Lincoln County, 
so it's helped all of them.  
James:  Final question for you, Chad. You mentioned some wonderful programs that have taken 
place here with th ese grants and funding. What has been the biggest surprise for you 
through any reactions to the programs, in terms of outcomes, what has surprised you 
most?  
Chad:  I think the biggest thing is how accepting our kids are ' little kids ' have been of it, the 
young kids. They have just taken off with the summer program stuff, but they've also 
taken off with the healthy eating stuff. We see a lot of kids now bring more fruit and 
vegetables to school in lunches than they ever did before. It's amazing when the kid s in 
the summer program eat and they see the food, that it tastes good, and they're like, 
'Oh that's a peach! That's a real peach!' you know, as opposed to open -a-can-of-syrup 
peaches, you know. And so seeing those kids like fresh fruit and vegetables as o pposed 
to there's a Snickers or there's a candy bar of some kind or something like that, that's 
been monumental. And I think just changing the culture of kids is a big deal at school. 
Prague's always prided itself on being a strong community, and seeing th ose young kids 
step up and go, you know, 'We can change our future for the better,' and so having 
access to those equipment, those fresh fruits and vegetables, seeing kids be active, you 
know, it's wonderful ' just my own kids , seeing them want to be more active than they 
were before. TSET's started walking programs, or they've started little ' back in the day, 
they had little contests back and forth just to get people up and  moving, has been the 
big thing ' how well accepted it was to the changes with the tobacco policies, with the 
Healthy Living policies, and the healthy parties and having healthy snacks at parties. So 
the kids have accepted it, they like it, and it's been beneficial for our community, too.  
James:  Thank you so much for your time. Really ap preciate it, and congratulations for all the 
success here that you've had i n Prague. And thank you David, you and Sheri . We 
appreciate your work here as well.   [46:46]  
James:  I tell ya, Cate, that was a fun visit.  
Cate:  I bet!  It sounds like Prague has done a really great job of reimagining what a classroom 
can be, which is something that we're all going to need to be looking more into as this 
next school year comes around. Learning through physical activity, having recess in t he 
morning, mentally engaging playground equipment ' and it seems like it's had a pretty 
demonstrable impact on these kids.  
James:  Absolutely. It really has.  
Cate:  You know, James, though the TSET Healthy Living Program and Healthy Incentive grants, 
TSET r eally plays a vital role for the health and wellness of many communities in so 
many different ways, and it was really eye -opening to just listen to just a few of those 
stories, but it's through these strategic improvements that TSET has and will continue t o 
transform communities that last s for generations.  
James:  Absolutely. You know, and through TSET grant programs for cancer research and 
statewide healthy systems ' through these other grants, people throughout Oklahoma, 
they gain even more benefit such as  what we heard and discussed last month a bout 
access to rural medicine. B ut we will talk more about these programs in the weeks and 
months to come. So for now, thank you so much for tuning in. We really appreciate it, 
and we hope that you got a lot out of this.  
 So until next time, this is James Tyree ' 
Cate : ' and Cate Howell.  
James : Wishing you peace ' 
Cate : ' and Better Health.  
 [Theme music]  
 [48:30 ] 
 